The last chapter put forth the claim that organizations play a major role in determining the kind of technologies we get. To be sure, these organizations are not all-powerful. When business firms are involved, consumers can affect technological change by deciding whether or not to buy their products. As employees, we might be able to exert some influence through our acceptance or rejection of new workplace technologies. But not all of the major decisions affecting the trajectory of technological change are made in the private sector. To a large extent, government organizations influence technological choices. In a democratic society, this should expand the power of citizens to get the technologies they want. But do they? Does governmental involvement in the development of technology necessarily result in more beneficial technologies? Are democratic ideals realized in the operation of government policies and processes? These are some of the issues that will be addressed in the following survey of the government's role in shaping technological change.

Government Actions and the Shaping of Technology
The involvement of the federal government in technological change is as old as the Republic. The United States of America emerged during an era when technological change was beginning to accelerate, and the framers of the Constitution believed that the government should encourage technological advance through the granting of patents and copyrights to those who had produced new things. Accordingly, Article 1, Section 8, of the Constitution stipulates that Congress is to “promote the Progress of Science and Useful Arts by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the Exclusive Rights to their respective Writings and Discoveries.”
The government's granting of patent rights provides the legal framework for technological advances generated by individuals and private organizations. The government also supports other types of infrastructure that are essential to the creation, development, and use of modern technologies. Since the ultimate basis of technological advance is the growth of knowledge, governments at all levels do much to indirectly sponsor technological advance through their support of education. Federal aid to individual students has supported the education of large numbers of scientists, engineers, and technicians. Moreover, in recent decades, institutions of higher learning have been major sources of technological advance through their research activities. These activities were strongly encouraged by the passage of P.L. 96-517, commonly known as the Bayh-Dole Act, in 1980. Under its provisions, universities receiving federal research funds that aid in the creation of innovative products and processes can obtain patents on them. Although some universities have reaped substantial revenues from these patents, critics have voiced concerns that the pursuit of these revenues has undermined some of the basic values of the university, such as the pursuit of knowledge for its own sake and the free transmission of knowledge. Moreover, the pursuit of patents has not been as lucrative as many have hoped. A few patents have been spectacularly successful from a financial standpoint; the gene-splicing technology developed by Herbert Boyer and Stanley Cohen brought $200 million in revenues to Stanford University and the University of California, San Francisco. But patenting has not produced financial windfalls for most institutions; two-thirds of the revenues generated by university-held patents have gone to only 13 institutions.
In addition to maintaining the patent system and supporting education and university research, government programs also provide the auxiliary goods and services that are essential for the use of particular technologies. For example, high-speed air travel requires more than just jet aircraft; equally important are government-supported airports, air traffic controllers, weather forecasts, and safety inspections. To take another obvious example, the effective use of automobiles is dependent on a network of roads and highways, as well as driver training in the schools, the enactment and enforcement of traffic laws, and so on.
The case of the automobile brings up another reason for government involvement in technological matters. Every significant technological change brings with it an assortment of auxiliary consequences, some of them pernicious. The private automobile has generated many benefits, but it has also created a number of problems. These problems are not borne exclusively by individual car owners, and for this reason they are known as “negative externalities.” That is, they are costs that are not directly taken into account when a person buys a car and puts it on the road; they are external to the market exchange between the buyer and the seller of the car. In operating a car, the owner incurs a number of personal costs: gas, insurance, repairs, and monthly payments that seem to go on forever. But at the same time, the operation of the car results in costs for the society as a whole: increased pollution, congestion, and so on. Since these costs are not included in the market transaction, governmental action is necessary. To take a notable example, the negative externality of automobile-generated air pollution is commonly addressed by regulations that require the installation of emission-control devices. Alternatively, the government could assess an emission tax, thereby making it financially advantageous for an owner to install these devices.
Some government policies and activities are not aimed directly at technological change, but they can strongly influence its scope and direction nonetheless. Tax policies can affect technological change by encouraging capital investments that often embody new technologies. Capital investment can be stimulated to some degree by taxing the income derived from investments at a lower rate than other sources of income. As a result, individuals and firms are motivated to invest their money in new machines and other productive goods. Capital investment can also be encouraged by allowing the accelerated depreciation of capital equipment. This means that the cost of a machine or other piece of equipment with a useful life of, say, 20 years can be used to offset taxes during a much shorter period. As a result, a firm's immediate profits are increased. Since business executives tend to be primarily concerned with short-term performance, accelerated depreciation can stimulate capital investments that embody new technologies. 
The government can also encourage the development and use of specific technologies by offering tax credits or deductions to those willing to invest in them. For many years the federal tax code provided an important benefit for oil producers by granting a depletion allowance that was used to offset corporate taxes. One result was the expansion of petroleum-based energy technologies. A different approach was taken during the 1970s when the energy crises of that period generated a strong interest in alternative sources of energy. One governmental response was to offer generous tax credits to people investing in wind-powered electrical generators, and as a result large numbers of wind turbines have been built in some areas.
As we have seen, innovation does not always respect existing social and legal arrangements, and the courts may be called upon to resolve issues generated by technological change. To take one example, until fairly recently biological parenthood was not a problematic concept; every child had a father and mother who jointly contributed to his or her conception. Since 1978, however, it has been possible to use in-vitro fertilization for this purpose. This practice has led to a number of legal conundrums centering on the definition of parenthood. One such issue has arisen as hundreds of men have had their sperm frozen for future artificial insemination because they suffered from a terminal disease, were soldiers about to be deployed to a combat zone, or simply as a precautionary measure. Some of these men did in fact die prior to a successful insemination and birth, giving rise to this question: Were their children entitled to the Social Security benefits that are paid to children whose father has died? In Florida, one man's widow filed for benefits on behalf of twins that had been born after her husband's death. The agency denied her claim, only to have the decision overturned by an appeals court. But in 2012 the United States Supreme Court unanimously overturned the lower court's decision because Florida barred inheritance for posthumously conceived children. But this is not the end of the matter. Although four states bar posthumously conceived children from receiving inheritances, the laws of 13 other states allow it. The remaining states lack specific laws regarding posthumous inheritance.
What is fair and proper in cases such as these? This situation will if anything become more common in the years to come; children can be born decades after the death of their biological father, given that frozen sperm can retain viability for up to 100 years. Issues such as these will become even more prominent in the future as advances in reproductive technologies alter the essential nature of parenthood and family. Judges and legislators will confront many issues and challenges regarding child custody, inheritances, and government benefits.
In addition to dealing with the consequences of emerging technologies, the federal government is directly involved in the generation of some of these technologies through its support of research and development. The scope of government involvement in R&D has grown massively in the postwar era. In 1940, the federal government spent only $67 million on the direct support of science and technology, the equivalent of about $1.03 billion today. For the 2010 fiscal year, the federal budget for R&D was about $147.1 billion.
Over the last few decades, government involvement in research has been skewed in favor of defense and space exploration. By the time of the last lunar landing, in late 1972, the Apollo program entailed expenditures of $19.4 billion, about $115 billion in today's dollars. More recently, the cost of the construction of the International Space Station came to about $100 billion dollars over a 12-year period, and its operation absorbs about $1.5 billion annually. In the 1984 fiscal year, a massive peacetime military buildup resulted in military R&D expenditures of $31.8 billion, almost 70 percent of the total federal R&D budget. The waning of the Cold War resulted in a significant reduction in the proportion of R&D funds allocated to defense. Even so, the military R&D budget for the 2010 fiscal year came to more than $82 billion, about 55 percent of the total federal R&D budget.Moreover, since 9/11 the federal government has greatly increased antiterrorism research and development. Support for technologies aimed at foiling terrorist attacks has increased significantly, as has R&D for code breaking. The extent of funding for the latter is classified, but it is known that the National Security Agency, the highly secretive organization that oversees this research, possessed the world's fastest computer in 2009 and is sponsoring the construction of an even faster one today. The raw data for these supercomputers will come from everything from personal e-mails and telephone records to bookstore purchases and travel itineraries, all of it intercepted and aggregated in a complex being built in Utah that will be five times the size of the U.S. Capitol.
Although the military sector absorbs a large portion of federal R&D resources, the funds allocated for other purposes are still considerable. In the 2010 fiscal year the federal budget for civilian R&D was $66.3 billion, with health and human services and energy accounting for $31.2 billion and $10.7 billion, respectively. All in all, by supplying about half of the funds used for the nation's R&D efforts, the federal government plays a very large role in the sponsorship of the nation's R&D. In turn, the allocation of federal R&D funds can significantly influence the direction of technological advance. To take a notable example, from fiscal year 2003 to 2012the federal government spent a total of nearly $40 billion on energy R&D. Of that sum, 25.4 percent went for fossil fuel R&D, and another 25.9 percent went to nuclear R&D, while R&D funds for energy efficiency and renewable energy accounted for 16.4 percent and 17.1 percent, respectively.

But Is It Really Necessary?
Why has government involvement in technological development increased to such a marked degree in the postwar era? In part it is due to the recognition that our prosperity is tied to our ability to advance technologically. Given the fierce competition of the international economy, the failure to maintain high technological levels can have severe consequences. Japan recognized this fact, and its Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI, now METI, the Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry) aggressively sponsored the development of selected high-technology industries such as semiconductors, genetic engineering, robots, and composite materials. Not only had it provided research funds, MITI also organized cooperative joint research efforts between firms in the same industry so that they could do collectively what they could not do individually.
The government of the United States has been less explicit in its sponsorship of technological advance, but it still has played a major role. The development of computers and semiconductors during the early 1950s was extensively supported by federal funds for research and development. Equally important, government procurement of the resulting products created a market at a time when sales within the private sector did not seem promising. In similar fashion, government procurement of aircraft engines and other components provided a strong stimulus for technological advances that spilled over into commercial aviation. Military needs were of course the main source of these efforts. Accordingly, it can be argued that during the postwar era the United States has had a de facto policy of supporting technological development, but unlike Japan, much of it has been driven by military rather than commercial considerations.
Important though they are, military requirements are not the sole justification for government support of technological advance. Although the market system has served as midwife to an abundance of innovative technologies, it cannot be expected to stimulate every type of technological innovation. Certain kinds of technological advances have little appeal to individual entrepreneurs, for they cannot be “packaged” for sale to individual consumers. Moreover, once these technologies are in place, they presumably benefit everyone, whether they pay for them or not. This is the so-called free rider problem. For example, some people may be ardent supporters of a cleaner environment, but if they were to individually pay for a power plant's smokestack scrubbers, everyone in the community would benefit equally, even though most of them made no financial contributions to the installation of the scrubbers. Under these circumstances, the government has to take the lead by mandating the development and installation of emission-control equipment or assessing a pollution tax that stimulates their installation. The costs would be borne by the operators of the power plant, who would likely pass them along to consumers in the form of higher utility bills. Alternatively, the government could subsidize the installation of scrubbers, and offset the subsidy by levying a tax.
Some activities produce benefits that are considerably greater than the returns that accrue to the individuals or firms that engage in them In contrast to negative externalities, these can be labeled “positive externalities.” In some cases, the potential social benefits may be great, but the private rate of return may be so small that no private party is willing to undertake them. This is frequently the case with basic research that has no direct payoff but provides a foundation for subsequent technological applications. Moreover, once the research has been done, the knowledge gained can be made available to everyone at little additional cost, thereby increasing its benefits to society as a whole. Under these circumstances it makes sense for the government to sponsor basic research, paying for it through taxation. This is precisely what has happened: 57 percent of the “pure” scientific research conducted in the United States is financed by the federal government and an additional 26 percent is funded by universities and other nonprofit agencies.

Government Institutions for the Guidance of Technology
A modern nation's economic and military security is closely tied to its ability to generate and absorb new technologies. At the same time, simply coping with all of the consequences of technological change can require the leadership and organization that only government can provide. For these reasons, many governments have established special departments and ministries charged with the promotion, control, and governance of technology. But this has not been the case in the United States. There is no cabinet-level Department of Technology, only a collection of congressional committees and government agencies that involve themselves in a plethora of separate issues and decisions. Some of these agencies reside within the executive branch as parts of cabinet-level departments (such as the Department of Energy's Nuclear Regulatory Commission), while others (such as NASA and the National Science Foundation) are quasi-independent agencies directly under the president.
The executive branch is best situated to bring some degree of coherence to technology policy, and in fact the president and his staff have on occasion played significant roles in determining the course of a particular technology by influencing legislation, designating agency heads, impounding funds, and using the other tools available to the president. The importance of having the president well advised on scientific and technological matters was recognized in 1957 with the formation of the Presidential Science Advisory Committee (PSAC) within the Eisenhower administration. PSAC was largely concerned with matters relating to defense and space, and when its members failed to support President Nixon's policies on missile defense and the construction of a supersonic airliner, PSAC was abolished in 1973 and some of its functions were transferred to the National Science Foundation. A formal structure for providing scientific and technical advice for the president was reconstituted in 1976 with the formation of the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP). The director of OSTP also serves as a member of the National Science and Technology Council, which was established by a 1993 executive order of President Clinton. In addition to the OSTP director, the council includes the president, vice president, and several cabinet-level officials and high-level administrators. Among its responsibilities are coordinating the science and technology policy-making process, making science and technology policies and programs consistent with the goals of the administration, and furthering international cooperation in science and technology. It is also the domain of the Chief Technology Officer, a position created by President Obama in 2009 and whose efforts have been directed toward making the government more effective and accessible through the use of current technologies.
Some presidents have had more interest in science and technology policies than others, but direct presidential involvement in the shaping of these policies has been infrequent in all administrations. On a few occasions, however, it has been highly significant. President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative (the “Star Wars” ballistic missile defense system) represented a major redirection of American defense policy, yet it began as an idiosyncratic effort. The president publicly announced the program only five days after informing his science adviser, while the joint chiefs of staff, the secretary of state, and the secretary of defense got only two days' notice. The chief scientist for the Pentagon learned of the proposal only nine hours before the speech that presented the program to the nation.
With presidential involvement in the setting of technology policy largely confined to a few major policy decisions, the day-to-day shaping of technological policy tends to be the business of Congress and various government agencies. Here, the disjointed nature of American technology policy is apparent. There is no unified approach to the budgeting of funds for research and development: over a dozen appropriation subcommittees in each house of Congress take a hand in determining the budgets of the agencies they oversee. These committees and subcommittees often have to address issues directly connected to technological matters. Congressional involvement with technological issues was recognized in 1972 by the creation of the Office of Technology Assessment (OTA), which had as its purpose the provision of information to Congress to help guide its decisions about technological policy, and to give it more leverage over the president in science and technology matters. OTA investigated a wide selection of topics that ranged from an examination of the physiological basis of drug addiction to an evaluation of the Social Security Administration's plans to upgrade its computer facilities. In its early years OTA was criticized for not taking on highly controversial topics, but it eventually became involved in contentious matters like the effectiveness of a proposed antimissile defense system. In the latter case, the publication of its report was delayed by a lengthy classification review, and in the end several key chapters were deleted due to the objections of the Defense Department. It is likely that the Defense Department's opposition had more to do with the negative tone of the report than with concerns about its revelation of military secrets.
As the last example indicates, OTA sometimes found it difficult to achieve a balance between the goals of its overseers in the federal government and the objectivity and neutrality characteristic of scholarly inquiry. Given the contentiousness of many technological issues and the frequent difficulty of separating facts from values, OTA was in an inherently precarious situation. Being on the “wrong side” in some controversial issues undercut OTA's support in Congress, especially after Republicans gained control of both houses in 1994. Despite strong bipartisan agreement on the value of OTA outside Congress, the office was dismantled a year later. Its demise seems to confirm the old joke that powerful individuals and groups tend to use expertise the way that a drunk uses a lamppost—more for support than for illumination.
As far as the actual working of Congress is concerned, policies relating to technology emerge from the many committees and subcommittees of the two legislative branches. Legislation affecting the development and use of technology is forged in bodies as disparate in their concerns as the House Armed Services Subcommittee and the Senate Agriculture Committee. These committees and subcommittees often work in conjunction with federal agencies and departments, such as NASA or the Department of Defense, that administer a particular technological sector. 

Processes
The most direct way that Congress determines the course of technological development is through passing laws that either forbid the use of a particular technology or regulate the way it is used. Indeed, the very notion that the government has a legitimate right to regulate private industry originated with the need to address a problem presented by a new technology—the explosion of riverboat steam boilers in the first half of the nineteenth century. The Franklin Institute in Philadelphia was given the task of investigating the construction and operation of boilers. Its report provided a wealth of information about boilers and their components, as well as a set of recommendations regarding their operation and maintenance, many of which were subsequently written into law by Congress. Today, government regulations cover a vast number of technological concerns, everything from the siting of nuclear power plants to the length of trucks.
Along with the passage of laws and regulations, the federal government affects the course of technological development through the budgetary process; that is, by deciding to pay for certain kinds of technologies and not others. In some cases, government financial support can be crucial. The supersonic transport plane (SST) literally never got off the ground because in 1971 Congress voted not to appropriate any more funds for its development. Also, as we have seen in Chapter 8, the George W. Bush administration severely restricted stem-cell research that used human embryos. Conversely, some technologies, such as civilian nuclear power, have received a large amount of financial and legal support from the federal government that has been crucial to their development and use.
Governmental decisions that affect technological development do not take place in a political vacuum. It often happens that technologies are sponsored because they have substantial outside support. Gaining government interest in addressing a technological issue is a crucial first step, and one that cannot be taken for granted. Here again, the piecemeal approach to governing technological change is evident. There is no clear and comprehensive approach to deciding what technological goals should (and should not) be pursued so that a governmental agenda can be set. Instead of being the product of calm deliberation, an issue is often put on the agenda because of some “focusing event”; an oil embargo forces a consideration of the energy technologies we use; the launch of Sputnik by the Soviet Union demonstrates the apparent need for an accelerated U.S. space program; a serious accident reveals material and organizational defects in the operation of nuclear power plants.
A sense of crisis and the need for decisive action also emerge when a social movement is directed at a particular technology. Some social movements have taken on well-established technologies that had remained under the radar until they became the subject of media exposés, notably hydraulic fracturing, or “fracking,” for the extraction of oil and gas. But large-scale protests are more likely to emerge when a new technological possibility lies just over the horizon. Technologies that have already been established, whatever their unfortunate consequences, simply do not generate the kind of concerns that new ones do. Cars, along with giving us our prized freedom of mobility, also befoul our environment, encourage ugly sprawl, and in 2010 killed nearly 33,000 people in the United States, the equivalent of a major commercial airline crash every two days. Yet few people consider bringing them under tighter governmental regulation or even abolishing them altogether.
Only a few technologies have generated much popular opposition. Such diverse technologies as the chlorination of water, the extensive use of medical X-rays, microwave ovens, and birth-control pills have received, at best, passing attention, and no sustained effort to subject them to governmental control. In fact, it is not entirely clear why some technologies and not others become the focus of widespread concern. But it is certainly true that a technology that produces large-scale failures, such as a nuclear reactor accident, is more likely to evince opposition than one that produces a series of small-scale failures, even though in aggregate their consequences may be great, as has been the case with automobiles. And it is also the case that media exposure can greatly heighten opposition to a technology with evident problems. Again, this sort of exposure is more likely when the failure is large and spectacular rather than diffuse and important only in the aggregate.
Examples of widespread public debate over new technologies are infrequent; most innovations emerge with little public attention. But this does not mean that politics has been irrelevant. As noted earlier, many new technologies owe their development and diffusion to sponsorship by particular governmental agencies. Since there is no centralized approach to the governance of technology, many key decisions are made at the middle levels of government, that is, by government agencies and congressional committees. It is here that decisions are made to sponsor a particular technology and to create the conditions necessary for its success. Technology policy is the sum of many separate policy actions undertaken at this level. Under these circumstances, the ambitions of individual governmental agencies and their administrators can determine the course of technological development, for an agency has a strong interest in pushing technologies that are in accordance with its own goals, and having them adopted as national policy.This is often achieved with little fanfare. Most decisions about technological policy do not generate much political heat, and a government agency may successfully promote a particular technology with little or no public discussion or debate.
The importance of government sponsorship can be seen in the history ofatomic power in the United States. In the mid-1950s, the electrical utilities, the greatest potential users of nuclear power, had little reason to make use of the new technology. According to one utility company president, “We weren't anxious to get into nuclear power, and I don't think any other company in its right mind wanted to get into it either.” To overcome this reticence, the key government agency, the Atomic Energy Commission, engaged in a large-scale selling job. A demonstration plant was built at Shippingport, Pennsylvania, in 1954, and technical assistance was offered to the industry, along with subsidized prices for nuclear fuel. This is not to say that the Atomic Energy Commission's actions were illegitimate or that civilian nuclear power owes its existence solely to government support, but it does show how national policy can be shaped by the interests of a particular government agency.
Since some government agencies are more powerful than others, their programs forge ahead while other agencies' projects languish. As a result, potentially significant programs are not enacted, or if enacted they are chronically underfunded, while more dubious ones move ahead. A few agencies are more influential than others because of the greater technical abilities of their staff and their greater interest in science and technology. But in many cases what really matters is who their clients are. Government agencies do not operate in splendid isolation; they are often closely tied to a particular set of clients. As we have seen with the Federal Communications Commission in Chapter 13, even when the task of the agency is regulation, it may be “captured” by the industry that it is supposed to regulate. This happens because the agency needs the support of the industry it oversees in order to maintain its legitimacy and resources. An agency may even delegate to the industry some of the regulatory tasks that it is charged with performing. For example, much of the inspection work performed before the Federal Aviation Administration certifies the airworthiness of a new airplane is actually done by engineers and technicians in the employ of the plane's manufacturer.
The close involvement of government agencies with powerful clients often results in the support of technologies that favor these clients. A great deal of government-sponsored agricultural research has focused on productivity improvements that require mechanization and generally high capital investments. Such research has benefited large, wealthy farmers most of all, and it has even contributed to the decline of small farms and the displacement of rural labor. But large farmers provide the bedrock of political support for the Department of Agriculture, and as a result this agency has primarily sponsored technological developments that benefit its most important and powerful clientele. It has been argued that government-sponsored technological development in general has been strongly oriented to the support of centralized, capital-intensive industries; the result, according to some critics, has been unemployment, environmental damage, increased energy consumption, and greater economic concentration.
If an industry has a strong interest in a particular technology, it may exert a great deal of influence, so Congress and the relevant government agencies will lend their support to that technology. In turn, members of Congress may find a particular technology to be politically attractive because it offers “pork barrel” benefits to their constituents. Some technologies, especially those in the military sector, have forged ahead because a project has contractors and subcontractors in a large number of congressional districts. Members of Congress quite naturally are likely to support programs that provide jobs and other economic benefits for their states and districts, and are willing to support projects that benefit the constituents of other representatives in return for support of projects that benefit their own.
In sum, as with many other government policies, the direction of technological policy often results from the interaction of an “iron triangle” of congressional committees, government agencies, and the key groups whose interests are closely affected by governmental decisions. The decision to sponsor a new technology, along with the shape that it takes as it is developed, is often determined by these triangles. This means that the government usually doesn't sponsor the development of new technologies as part of a general effort to find solutions to public problems. Rather, a technology is sponsored because a coalition can be formed from the members of the triangle, who see to it that the selected technologies develop in accordance with their own needs and interests.
It also happens that once under way, the development of a new technology builds up momentum. The personnel and agencies charged with its development have a strong interest in its continuation, as do potential users. As a result, a technological policy gets locked in place and options are closed off. In the absence of outside pressures, projects are destined to move ahead. Even when a technology has manifest problems of considerable magnitude, the sponsors of the technology will tend to “throw good money after bad,” for once the commitment has been made and the program is underway, it often is far more difficult to terminate a program than to continue with it.
This is one of the greatest defects of our system of governing technology. Technological change is an uncertain process, with many unforeseeable consequences. Efforts to forecast the precise consequences of a new technology so that policies can be constructed in advance to deal with them are doomed to failure. The best that can be hoped is that technologies can be stopped or modified if this should prove necessary. This is easier said than done. The effective governance of technology is faced with a fundamental paradox: change is easiest at the beginning, but this is when the need for it cannot be foreseen. As Ernest Fitzgerald, the whistle-blower we briefly met in Chapter 18, has said of military projects, “There are only two phases to a major program. The first phase: ‘It's too early to tell.' The second phase: ‘It's too late to stop.' ”
In this way, technology appears to be out of control, as many technologies seem to be driven by their own momentum. But this is not really what is happening; seemingly out-of-control technologies move ahead because they suit the real interests of individuals and organizations. Were these to be taken away, there would be far less reason to continue with the development or deployment of the technology. Technologies do not simply stand or fall on their own merits; their success or failure can often be attributed to the political support that they receive. And this political support will likely be a reflection of the distribution of power both inside and outside the corridors of government. Under these circumstances, is there any hope that an unorganized citizenry can have any influence over the way technology develops? It is to this, our last topic, that we will next turn.

The Democratic Control of Technology
The decisions and activities of experts, enterprise managers, and government officials have powerfully affected the kinds of technologies that have been developed, where they have been applied, and how their costs have been met. Most of us have been little more than the consumers of technologies that have been developed by people and organizations largely unknown to us. This process has produced spectacular successes and spectacular problems. Technology has extended our lives, lightened some of our burdens, increased our wealth, and kept us amused. At the same time, the advance of technology has left us with some very unpleasant by-products. This is not the place to attempt to determine if the good has outweighed the bad, for so much depends on what we value. Which way of living is preferable: that of the !Kung San, with its relaxed work patterns but material impoverishment and limited control of the environment, or our own, with its abundance of goods and knowledge, but frantic work schedules? In any event, for most of us the choice is moot; unless we decide to become nomadic hunter-gatherers or subsistence farmers, our lives will be lived in a world shaped by modern technology. At issue is not the acceptance or rejection of technology; what matters is how much individual influence we have over the choice of technologies that we use now and will use in the future.
As individuals, are we doomed to the passive acceptance of technological changes that have been decreed by others? Even if technological development has produced more good than bad, it has proceeded in a fashion that has put it beyond our individual control. It seems as though we have struck a bargain whereby we consume the fruits of technological advance in return for delegating to others the power to determine the technologies that shape the basic contours of our lives—everything from what we eat, to how we work, to the way we are entertained.
Most people seem to believe that this is a fair bargain. As we have seen in the first chapter of this book, there is not a great deal of anguish about our reliance on modern technology. Then, too, it must be remembered that democratic participation has its costs. Above all, the expansion of the number of people engaging in technological decision-making can disrupt the orderly processes favored by managers, engineers, and bureaucrats. This follows from the simple arithmetic of participation; the more parties there are to a decision, the harder it is to decide. The result is often a stalemate—“my vote cancels yours.” Everybody ends up with veto power, but no one is able to act in a positive fashion. At best, the result is compromise, which may be a reasonable conclusion in some areas, but in matters that require decisive action, such as stopping the spread of weapons of mass destruction or significantly mitigating global warming, a compromise decision may be worthless or even dangerous.
Does this mean that there is no middle ground between an apathetic acceptance of technological change decreed by others and a paralyzing stalemate? Can democratic participation be reconciled with technological advance? Before these questions can be answered, it is obviously necessary to have some workable definition of democracy. A vast amount of thinking and writing has gone into this issue, and we cannot presume to break any new ground here. But most of us could agree that a democratic process is one in which the people as a whole are able to participate in making meaningful choices about the things that affect their lives. The capitalist economic system does contain some democratic elements, for consumers can choose to buy or not buy particular products, and in so doing they affect the course of technological change. There has been a “democratic” affirmation of hybrid cars, but not of battery-powered ones. And certainly consumer choice has dictated the shift to smaller cars whenever gasoline prices shoot up. But these are choices made after the fact. Consumers can choose only between existing alternatives; they cannot determine which alternatives will be made available to them. This is a bit like voting in a referendum; the electorate can decide an issue, but it does not determine which issues are put on the ballot in the first place.
In similar fashion, democratic choice can be exercised by voting for or against candidates because of their stance on a key technological issue. There have been local elections that have hinged on a candidate's position on the fluoridation of water or on nuclear power, but these have been rare. Elections are usually fought over a variety of issues; technological policy has been but one, and usually a minor one at that. And even where a technological issue is at the center of a campaign, the voters' voices are heard only after a technology is already in place, as with referenda on nuclear power. There is virtually no popular input into whether or not completely new technologies should be developed. In this sense, democratic controls are at best reactive.
Is it possible to have democratic control of technology that goes beyond these after-the-fact votes? In some ways, the advance of technology has increased the potential for democratic participation in government. Most importantly, the electronic media have heightened our awareness of political issues. It has often been remarked, for example, that the widespread protests against the Vietnam War were stimulated by the horrible realities of warfare appearing on television day after day. At the same time, however, exposure does not guarantee an enlightened response. As we have seen, the expansion of newspaper reading that was triggered by the invention of the steam-powered rotary press stimulated a great outpouring of jingo-ist sentiment and the fanning of imperialist ambitions in the United States. Finally, many critics have decried the present-day debasement of the political process by slickly produced advertisements for candidates and ballot initiatives. It thus seems that advances in communication technologies have had mixed consequences for the democratic process. The electronic media in general and the Internet in particular hold out the prospect of a more informed electorate, but the positive contributions of these media are often overwhelmed by the negative ones, just as happened with the rise of the popular press generations earlier.
Advances in electronic media have also presented the possibility of direct democracy through a kind of electronic town hall. Instead of delegating decisions to elected officials, every citizen could use an Internet site to vote on the pressing issues of the day. Such a system is certainly technologically feasible, but is it a practical possibility? Security questions aside, could voters be expected to be sufficiently well-informed to pass judgment on everything from levels of farm price supports to the wisdom of supplying arms to a revolutionary movement in some far-off land? And even if such a system were implemented, would it really result in a truly democratic order? It is obvious that people could not vote on every single issue, so some kind of rationing would have to be instituted. Some agency would have to determine what got on the “ballot” in the first place, and this would be a source of power in itself. The ability to set governmental agendas—the determination of which issues make it into the political arena—is a crucial political decision, and this system would do nothing to democratize this process. All voters could do would be to make choices according to a preplanned agenda.
Given the limitations of direct democracy, we necessarily have to rely on some form of representative democracy. Unfortunately, the established institutions of representative democracy in the United States have not always guided technological development in ways that serve the public interest. The key political actors have been especially responsive to large, well-organized bodies, such as industries, labor unions, and other special interests. All too often the common good is lost to the special pleadings of these groups. Compounding the problem is the fact that the political process is fragmented, which allows government agencies and officials to cut deals with special interests while no one looks after the needs and concerns of the nation as a whole. Under these circumstances, government officials end up representing themselves and their powerful constituents rather than the people who voted them into office.
Does this mean that there is no hope that individual citizens can affect the course of technological change? Despite what has just been said, there is some room for optimism, and there are numerous occasions when democracy can assert itself in technological affairs. Democracy may work best when issues are close to home. To note two recent examples, concerns about their effects on local environments have motivated well-organized protests over fracking and the construction of an oil pipeline passing through the Midwest. In contrast, many pressing but seemingly far-off technological issues do not engage the interest of people distracted by their individual problems of raising a family, meeting mortgage payments, or studying for exams. Burdened with mundane daily problems, it is all too easy for us to deny that there is an urgent need to do something about nuclear proliferation or climate change. The perception that immediate, local concerns are being affected by technological change can therefore energize greater levels of public perception than is the case when the issues seem too large and remote to concern us. There is considerable wisdom in the slogan that enjoins us to “think globally and act locally.”
It must be admitted that local politics is uninteresting to many people, as the usually low levels of voter turnout for local elections attest. Moreover, participation at the grassroots level faces the same limits as other kinds of political participation; involvement can be time-consuming and stressful, and people would prefer to leave the tasks of governance to local officials. But at the same time, involvement in technological policies that have a direct impact on one's own community can reduce apathy and lethargy. And it might also be the case that expanding democratic participation and tying technological issues to local concerns would result in the emergence of technologies significantly different from those produced by our present system.
Finally, while our governmental structures and processes have produced some technologies of very questionable value, we should also realize that no system of guiding technology will guarantee a utopia. No matter how advanced or benign our technologies, human life will always have its insecurities, disappointments, and tragedies. It can even be argued that it is dangerous to seek perfection in both our technological and political systems. There is something inhuman about a society that cannot tolerate the fact that life does not always go according to plan. The invention and development of new technologies have been characterized as ongoing searches for the “best way,” and elegantly satisfactory solutions to technological problems do emerge on a regular basis. But most of life is not like that. We will always have to reconcile ourselves to the fact that even the most advanced and responsive technologies will not solve many of our basic problems. As we have seen, the spectacular advances of many individual technologies should not blind us to the fact that some of the inherent difficulties of life are simply not amenable to technological solutions.

The Challenges of the Future
In considering the years ahead, it is well to recall the waggish statement that it's dangerous to make predictions, especially about the future. The course of technologicaldevelopment has produced many surprises, and it will continue to do so. Fifty years ago few would have foreseen the emergence of smartphones with the power of existing mainframes. Yet at about the same time it was confidently predicted that nuclear generating plants would produce electricity “too cheap to meter.” Forecasting is a highly inexact art, and although it can be safely said that our lives will be strongly influenced by technological change, predictions beyond this general statement are fraught with hazards.
Even so, the general contours of future technological developments can be discerned. Advances in transportation and electronic communication will bring the people of the world even closer together. The Internet will be the basis for ever-increasing amounts of information, media presentations, and social interaction. Advances in nanotechnology, materials, and microprocessors will produce fundamental changes in the design and operation of many objects. The application of artificial intelligence could affect every aspect of work, play, and learning. And genetic engineering might allow nothing less than the redesign of human beings. Profound social changes will be necessary if we choose to make use of these technologies.
And yet, just because these things are possible does not mean that they should be done. We don't have to resign ourselves to the inexorable advance of technology while passively hoping that it produces more good than harm. Technology remains a human creation, and we have it in our power to determine its future course. Unfortunately, the power to make this determination is very unevenly distributed through society. A major reason for this unequal distribution of power is the unequal distribution of knowledge. This is especially unfortunate because a knowledgeable citizenry has always been essential to the functioning of democracy. In the words of Thomas Jefferson, “If we think [the people] not enlightened enough to exercise their control with a wholesome discretion, the remedy is not to take it from them, but to inform their discretion.” The expansion of citizens' knowledge is even more crucial than it was in the days of Jefferson, when most adults worked as farmers and humans had never traveled faster than the speed of a horse. The relentless advance of technology has produced a dizzying pace of change that at times leaves us gasping. Even so, it bears repeating that technology is our own creation, and that its ultimate source is knowledge. But for technology to be truly beneficial, more than technical knowledge is required. Our challenge will be to develop and apply many different kinds of knowledge—ethical, philosophical, sociological, political, and economic—so that we can do a better job of defining our real needs and creating the technologies that serve them.
I hope that this book has given you some of the knowledge necessary to participate in shaping a future that will be strongly influenced by the technological decisions we make. But acquiring knowledge is not enough; it is also necessary to apply that knowledge. And that will be up to you.