The word “manufacture” literally means the production of something by hand, and for most of human history, it was just that. Goods were produced in small numbers by individual craftsmen who relied on little more than their own skills and a few tools. This situation began to change markedly in the middle of the eighteenth century as industrialization began to transform the way that things were made. To be sure, this was a revolution that was a long time in the making; people did not pick up their newspapers one day in 1750 and read “Industrial Revolution Breaks Out in England!” Many of the changes that produced an industrial society were small and slow to develop. Others were more dramatic, but even these required numerous incremental changes before they were effective. But taken together, these changes utterly transformed the way things were made, and with them the way people worked. This process continues today, with technological advance constantly changing the nature of work. In this chapter we will consider the historical relationships between work and industrialization, as well as where they seem to be headed today. 

Industrial Production 
An economy based on industrial production has a number of special characteristics. In the first place, it requires large amounts of energy. Before industrialization, almost all of the energy used came from organic sources: human and animal muscle power and the burning of wood and other plant products. Civilization rested on the physical labor of peasant farmers and artisans (and in many places, slaves), whose efforts produced the surplus that supported the activities of small numbers of artists, priests, and government officials. The use of new sources of energy allowed vast increases in production while at the same time lightening some of the physical burdens of work. 
The first new energy source for the emerging industrial economy was water power. Water wheels date back to antiquity, and were widely employed during the Middle Ages; over 5,000 of them could be found in England according to the eleventh-century Domesday Book. But these were simple devices that produced little power. With the mechanization of key industries such as spinning, weaving, and flour milling, larger, more elaborate wheels began to be used in great numbers. To an increasing degree they were built according to systematic, empirically derived principles, making them significantly more efficient.
Water wheels continued to be important industrial power sources well into the nineteenth century, at which time they slowly began to be supplanted by steam engines. Originally built to pump water out of mines, during the late eighteenth century the steam engine was brought to a higher level of efficiency by James Watt’s invention of the separate condenser. Of equal importance, Watt devised new linkages and gearing systems so that the up-and-down motion of a piston could be translated into rotary motion, which was essential for the powering of many types of industrial machinery. 
During the Industrial Revolution steam engines and water wheels animated a great number of new machines. Among the most important of these were machine tools that could produce large numbers of identical parts. The possibilities of this system were first indicated in the early nineteenth century when the Franco-British engineer Marc Brunel teamed up with Henry Maudsley, a pioneer designer and builder of machine tools, to produce large numbers of pulley blocks for the British Navy. After they installed 44 machines at the Portsmouth (England) Navy Yard, their staff of 10 workers was able to produce 160,000 blocks a year, a larger output than the one that had been achieved by 110 men using traditional techniques. 
The installation of power-driven machinery was complemented by the establishment of a new setting for productive work: the factory. Instead of the craftsman’s shop with its half-dozen or so workers, the dominant manufacturing enterprise was the large factory in which hundreds and even thousands of people performed the tasks that large-scale production required. As industrialization took hold, the size of manufacturing establishments grew rapidly. In 1870 one of the largest industrial enterprises in the United States, the McCormick reaper plant in Chicago, employed no more than 500 workers. Thirty years later, more than a thousand factories had between 500 and 1,000 workers, and over 400 had more than 1,000. Three steel plants and a locomotive works each had more than8,000 workers. 
With the spread of the factory system, most manufacturing workers no longer worked as self-employed artisans. They now worked for a business firm, and were dependent on it for the tools they used, the facilities they worked in, and of course the money they took home. Independent workers ceased to be the foundation of the economy. The typical worker was now a hired member of a firm, a wage-earner rather than an independent producer. Industrialization had created a society of employees. 
The supervision and coordination of large numbers of employees, in turn, required entirely new methods of organization. Not only were far more people working in a single enterprise, they were also socially and psychologically separate from their employers and detached from their other social roles and responsibilities. As a result, the face-to-face contact and personal attachments found in the craftsmen’s shop gave way to bureaucratized managerial methods. Hierarchical command structures, written rules, strict job definitions, the precise scheduling of work, and rigid procedures became typical ways of organizing production. 

Machine-Paced Labor 
The spread of industrial technologies helped to make work a more regular and precisely scheduled process. New power technologies were of particular importance in making work follow strict temporal rhythms. Industrial processes that made use of steam engines and water wheels were obviously unsuited to irregularly paced methods of working. Since they were expensive pieces of capital equipment, these power sources and the machines they ran had to be operated constantly if they were to be used efficiently; sitting idle they produced no income. This meant that not only were the times of work more precisely scheduled, but work had to be performed at all hours. Shift work and labor at unsociable hours made their appearance, a situation that stood in marked contrast to the life of the craftsman working under guild regulations that usually prohibited working at night or under any form of artificial illumination. 
Many of the new industries that emerged in the nineteenth century gave further impetus to precisely scheduled, clock-regulated work patterns. This was especially evident in the operation of one of the era’s key industries, the railroad. The size of this new enterprise, the multiplicity of tasks required, and above all the need for adhering to precise schedules made the railroad a key example of the temporal regularization of work. The emphasis on scheduling and the efficient use of time also had an effect on the larger economy and society. As Henry David Thoreau said of the railroads of his era: 
They come and go with such regularity and precision, and their whistles can be heard so far, that farmers set their clocks by them, and thus one well-regulated institution regulates a whole country. Have not men improved somewhat in punctuality since the railroad was invented? Do they not talk and think faster in the depot than they did in the stage office? 
During the railroad’s earliest years, railwaymen were required to carry “good watches and correct them daily.” From that time onward, the conductor’s pocket-watch, accurate to a few seconds a day, became emblematic of his occupation. On a larger scale, the demands of railroads led to the establishment in 1883 of Standard Time and the division of the United States into four time zones. No longer would each community observe a unique time that was based on a noontime determined by the highest point of the sun’s passage. A new technological system had produced the artificial method of marking time that we take so much for granted today. 
The railroad was not the only industry that required high standards of temporal regularity in the workplace. In factories of every sort, workers had to accommodate themselves to the demands of the machinery, and in many cases the machines were harsh taskmasters. And not only was the pace more frenetic and unvarying, the work itself was often highly unsatisfying. For many of the new industrial occupations, the required work often called for only the most rudimentary skills. Many machines were designed so that the skill required inhered in the machine and not in the worker who tended it. Although the traditional labors of artisans and farmers also had their periods of drudgery and monotony, the factories that sprang up in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries seemed to usher in a new era of deadening labor—repetitious, narrowly specialized, radically simplified, and paced by the machine. 
The employment of large numbers of workers, each performing specialized tasks that had to be closely scheduled and coordinated in accordance with the needs of machinery, necessarily resulted in the loss of worker autonomy. Even Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx’s collaborator and a strong advocate of the rights of working people, was convinced that industrial technologies resulted in a regime that was “more despotic than the small capitalist who employs workers ever has been.” Engels stressed that industrial technology required strict managerial authority: 
If man, by dint of his knowledge and inventive genius has subdued the forces of nature, the latter avenge themselves upon him by subjecting him, in so far as he employs them, to a veritable despotism independent of all social organization. Wanting to abolish authority in large-scale industry is tantamount to wanting to abolish industry itself, to destroy the power loom in order to return to the spinning wheel. 
Industrial technology thus stands indicted as the destroyer of long-established ways of working that had allowed workers to enjoy at least some measure of independence. Machinery and the accompanying factory system increased production, but only at the cost of a cold, regimented on-the-job existence. Many would consider it a poor bargain. But the story is not yet complete; before we blame the advance of technology for the degradation of work, we must consider how these technologies came into being and whose interests they served.

Is Technology to Blame? 
Industrialization resulted in rapid and sustained economic growth and a massive increase in consumer goods. But at the same time, for many people it meant a thoroughly unpleasant work environment. Were industrial technologies in themselves the cause of the long working hours, monotonous routines, and the general degradation of labor often found in industrial economies? Here we again meet a fundamental question about the nature of technology: Does technology determine a basic human process such as work, or is technology itself shaped by economic and social relationships? 
The history of industrial technologies seems to indicate that similar technologies can support a variety of working arrangements. The use of steam power did not always require massive factories under centralized direction. In the Coventry ribbon industry, weaving was done on power looms situated in blocks of independent workshops that were arranged so that they could make use of a single steam engine. By the mid-nineteenth century, these cottage factories contained over 1,000 power looms, as many as could be found in the conventional factories throughout the city. 
The Coventry ribbon-weaving industry is not an isolated example. In Sheffield and Birmingham, cities at the very heart of England’s Industrial Revolution, local artisans could rent workspaces supplied with transmission belts connected to a centralized steam engine; “Power to Let” was a sign commonly seen in Birmingham during this period. Fundamental mechanical innovations of the early nineteenth century, such as the Jacquard loom (which introduced the use of punch cards for the guidance of an industrial operation), were used not in large factories but in small workshops that were often part of the workman’s home. 
By themselves, these examples do not prove much. As we have seen, a fundamental feature of technological advance is that innovations begin to be used on a small scale and are steadily expanded as experience is gained with them. Still, the late-nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century deployment of machines in factories of ever-increasing size was not simply the result of increasing technological sophistication; putting workers into large factories may also have been motivated by a need to control and discipline them. 
Employers had long contended with strong-willed, independent workers under a variety of working arrangements. Before the Industrial Revolution one such arrangement was the domestic (or “putting out”) system of manufacture. An employer supplied workers with tools and raw materials that were to be used in the workers’ own homes. The employer then picked up the finished product several weeks later. This system gave the workers a good deal of autonomy and flexibility—too much, as far as many employers were concerned. The lack of direct supervision often resulted in shoddy products and a slow pace of production. Even worse, some workers bilked their employers by selling the raw materials, using an inferior substitute, and pocketing the difference. 
Given these managerial problems, it is easy to see the appeal that the factory had for many employers. Within the walls of the factory, the workers were required to put in regular hours while the pace of their work was controlled by foremen who closely supervised their activities. Although perhaps overstated, one scholar’s summation captures an essential reason for the development of the factory:
It was purely for purposes of discipline, so that workers could be effectively controlled under the supervision of foremen. Under one roof, or within a narrow compass, they could be started to work at sunrise and kept going until sunset, barring periods for rest and refreshment. They could be kept working six days a week. And under the penalty of loss of all employment they could be kept going almost throughout the year. 
The development of the factory made close managerial control possible. Even so, the closest management by itself cannot ensure regular work efforts. Unless one supervisor can be assigned to each worker, the latter will always find ways to escape scrutiny and evade work if so inclined. In extreme cases, disgruntled workers can even resort to sabotage, a word that derives from the throwing of wooden shoes—sabots—into the machinery. In a setting where workers are employees and have no direct stake in the success of their enterprise, such inclinations are likely to be widespread. In working environments like these, machinery takes on an importance that goes beyond the improvement of productive processes. Machine-based technologies can ensure that work is steadily performed and that it is performed in accordance with the requirements of the management. As one critic of management-inspired industrial technologies put it:
Machinery offers to management the opportunity to do by wholly mechanical means that which it had previously attempted to do by organizational and disciplinary means. The fact that many machines may be paced and controlled according to centralized decisions, and that these controls may thus be in the hands of management, removed from the site of production to the office—these technical possibilities are of just as great interest to management as the fact that the machine multiplies the productivity of labor. 
Machines can be complex and hard to manage, but people are even more difficult. Many employers eagerly sought machine technologies as a way of counteracting the vagaries of human motivation and performance. Machines provided a model of reliable performance, as well as a way of coaxing it out of their workers. The factory system that began to emerge in the late eighteenth century was not exclusively the consequence of the technologies employed; at least as important as the operational requirements of machine-based technologies were the desires and intentions of management.

Industrial Technology and the Division of Labor 
A major characteristic of an industrial society is an extensive division of labor. Instead of a single craftsman performing all of the tasks involved in making a product, production is broken into small segments, each one performed by a different worker. This reduces production costs, as it is not necessary to pay top wages to a highly skilled worker to do everything; some of the work can be done by a person with lesser skills at lower wages. 
Production based on division of labor requires managerial control, but equally important, it makes such control easier to exert. As long as tasks are kept simple so that workers can be readily hired and fired, there will be little need to depend on workers with all-around skills. This can benefit management because the special abilities of skilled workers generate an independent spirit and a fair amount of economic leverage, as John Delorean’s description of the behavior of skilled toolmakers in the automobile industry illustrates:
These fine old tool makers worked hard and were very proud of their craft. They kept their big tool boxes right underneath their work benches. If you looked at them the wrong way or dealt with them in any manner other than a man-to-man, professional fashion, they would simply reach under their work benches without saying a word, throw their tools into the big box, lock it up and leave. That was it. Each guy figured, “What the hell. I don’t have to take this from anybody. I’m a pro. I know this business and I am not depending on you or anyone else.”
The ultimate marriage of machine technology and the division of labor is the assembly line. Instead of using a variety of skills and working at their own pace, workers perform specialized and repetitious tasks that are dictated by the tempo of the moving line. The development of this system of production is attributed to Henry Ford, and rightfully so. After taking his inspiration from the meat-packing industry (which, of course, used a “disassembly” line), Ford and his associates realized productive gains that had scarcely been imagined in the past. Before Ford’s introduction of the moving line in 1913, automobiles were produced in small batches by workers with a multiplicity of skills. The work was undoubtedly more satisfying, but the product was high in price and necessarily limited to the rich. The assembly line allowed dramatic price cuts for two reasons: it drastically reduced the time needed for manufacture, and it allowed the substitution of low-wage, unskilled labor for the high-priced labor of all-around craftsmen. Ford’s description of work in his factory captures the essence of this new form of manufacture:
One man is now able to do somewhat more than four did only a comparatively few years ago. That line established the efficiency of the method and we now use it everywhere. The assembling of the motor, formerly done by one man, is now divided into eighty-four operations—those men do the work that three times their number formerly did. . . . In the chassis assembling [room] are forty-five separate operations or stations. The first men fasten four mudguard brackets to the chassis frame; the motor arrives on the tenth operation and so on in detail. Some men do only one or two small operations, others do more. The man who places a part does not fasten it—the part may not be fully in place until after several operations later. The man who puts in a bolt does not put on the nut; the man who puts on the nut does not tighten it. 
The extreme division of labor found on the assembly line was paralleled by an unrelenting tempo of work and the absence of any control over it by the workers. Until recent efforts at “job enlargement” began to change the nature of automobile production, manufacturing methods followed the Ford pattern closely. With the typical automobile assembly line churning out 50 to 60 vehicles per hour, each worker had but a few seconds to complete an operation such as mounting a shock absorber or installing a windshield. When problems arose, the worker had to make the best of a bad situation, even if it meant installing something improperly. Under these circumstances work can be little more than a rather unpleasant way of earning a living. Extracting any sense of personal fulfillment from the work performed is just about impossible.

Scientific Management Once Again 
In addition to controlling the pace of work through the use of the assembly line, managers also attempted to regulate work by using elaborate systems that removed all vestiges of worker control over work processes. The most significant of these was Frederick Taylor’s Scientific Management, which was briefly discussed in Chapter 2. The important thing to reiterate here is that Scientific Management stipulated the precise scheduling and organizing of work activities, and that these procedures were never to be left to the workers’ discretion. As Taylor explained his system, “Perhaps the most prominent single element in modern scientific management is the task idea. The work of every workman is fully planned out by the management at least one day in advance, and each man receives in most cases complete written instructions, describing in detail the task which he is to accomplish, as well as the means to be used in doing the work. . . . This task specifies not only what is to be done, but how it is to be done and the exact time allowed for doing it.”
The development of these instructions was the work of a small group of technical specialists who were not directly involved with the work being performed, for, as Taylor stipulated, “All possible brain work should be removed from the shop and centered in the planning or laying-out department.” Efficient work required unfettered control by specially trained managers, who were to be the repository of all knowledge regarding the work being done: “The managers assume . . . the burden of gathering together all of the traditional knowledge which in the past has been possessed by the workmen and then of classifying, tabulating, and reducing this knowledge to rules, laws, and formulae.”
Many would see Taylorism as a perversion of scientific means of inquiry and a travesty of engineering practice. But repellent as it may seem to us today, the spirit of Scientific Management still lives in technologically advanced societies. The explosion of knowledge that is the driving force of our sophisticated economy can fragment the population into groups of specialized experts. This may be a natural outcome of the growth of knowledge, but it takes on a pernicious quality when specialized knowledge is the exclusive possession of one group of people who attempt to use it as a means of dominating others. Under these circumstances science and technology do not simply supply detached knowledge that is used for universal human betterment. They are used to strengthen the position of a dominant group byremoving the control over work processes from the hands of those doing the actual work. 

Industrial Work and Recent Technological Developments 
Many social critics have decried the human consequences of technologies and managerial strategies that take the skill out of human labor. Others have taken a different tack, arguing that an industrial system that “de-skills” workers is doomed to failure. A great deal of contemporary industrial work, according to this perspective, requires substantial amounts of independence if it is to be done effectively. A modern factory and its constituent departments cannot be expected to hum along indefinitely like a well-oiled machine, nor can all of the jobs be precisely defined and completely subject to control from above. Breakdowns, disruptions, and normal deterioration are inevitable, and they all require prompt attention and often a fair amount of innovative ability on the part of the workers.
Even routine tasks often require knowledge of special quirks in the machines and work processes. This knowledge can be gained only through intimate acquaintance with the work itself; engineers cannot plan everything in advance. There are many occasions when shop-floor workers understand things better than their bosses, and their involvement in production processes may be essential to a firm’s success. This point was strongly articulated by a General Electric executive when he noted, “All of the good ideas —all of them—come from hourly workers.” Workers who have been reduced to mindless operatives may not even be able to keep the machinery going when the inevitable problems emerge. Accordingly, effective managers realize that the destruction of worker skills through mechanization and rigid centralized controls is self-defeating, for an ignorant and hostile work force means production losses as well as high costs for maintenance and direct supervision.
A precisely programmed production process that makes use of specialized machinery while sharply separating the tasks of those who plan and those who work is possible only when the product is a standardized one. This system generated a great outpouring of mass-produced goods, but it may not be appropriate to today’s economy and society. With improvements in the overall standard of living, consumers are less willing to buy exactly the same things that their neighbors do. Instead, they have an appetite for goods and services with distinctive qualities. These cannot be produced by traditional manufacturing processes. As former Secretary of Labor Robert Reich has argued, rigid production technologies were appropriate only when business enterprises were “engaged in high-volume, standardized production, entailing a large number of repetitive tasks with clearly defined goals, in which almost all contingencies could be identified and covered.” In contrast, the production of nonstandardized items requires much more flexibility, making it difficult to replace human skills with machines and machinelike processes. At the same time, the continual modification and customization of products and procedures require the ongoing efforts of a variety of workers—designers, toolmakers, computer programmers, systems analysts, setup personnel, maintenance and repair staff, construction workers, and machinists, as well as personnel involved in marketing, distribution, sales, and service. All of these occupations require a fair degree of skill and on-the-job autonomy. 
The production of standard products for a mass market creates a fertile ground for the extreme division of labor and the de-skilling of work that was typical of many businesses during the nineteenth century and a good part of the twentieth. But when consumers continually demand new, nonstandard products, existing ways of producing things no longer make sense from an economic standpoint. Firms that cling to the old routines not only oppress their workforce, they run the risk of eventual bankruptcy. 

Technological Change and White-Collar Work 
At this point it can be fairly argued that a concentration on industrial work is misplaced. As was noted in the previous chapter, the number of workers in manufacturing enterprises has steadily declined in relative terms, and these workers are now a small segment of the labor force. Work on the assembly line, often considered the epitome of industrial work, in reality occupies only a tiny fraction of workers in the manufacturing sector. Due to fundamental changes in the economy, the typical worker in the United States no longer toils on some factory floor.
As the number of manufacturing jobs relative to the total labor force has declined, more and more people are now found in white-collar occupations. More workers are engaged in what the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics classifies as “office and administrative support occupations” than any other type of work. Today, the typical workplace is not the factory but the office. Some analysts have seen this as an indication that the general occupational level has improved. Moreover, it has been argued that technological change has in many cases increased skill requirements and allowed clerical workers to take on broader responsibilities, an assertion that will be taken up in the last part of this chapter. 
Although some technologies have the potential to empower workers, others are used to monitor them continuously. These technologies are especially appealing to managers like the one who stated, “I’m a great one for believing that people will really do what’s inspected and not what’s expected.” They now have at their disposal many ways to monitor their employees. As Ellen Alderman and Caroline Kennedy have noted: “Keystroke monitoring (where the computer counts the number of keystrokes per minute), telephone accounting monitoring (where the number of phone calls per hour and the length of each call are recorded), as well as service observation (where supervisors listen in on calls), and keeping track of unplugged time (measuring time spent away from the computer) are all becoming commonplace.” To these can be added the counting of mouse clicks and the monitoring of e-mail messages, sometimes with programs that detect potentially incriminating words like “boss” and “union.” Even executive and higher-level employees are not immune; laptop computers, cell phones, and voice mail all can keep employees tethered to an “electronic leash” that can make work a 24/7 obligation. 
Industries and organizations, as well as the workers who are employed by them, vary immensely, making it impossible to come to a summary judgment of the consequences of technological change for white-collar work. Twenty-first-century technologies offer expanded opportunities for monitoring workers, but they also have the potential to empower these workers by making available vast troves of information that used to be available only to upper-echelon managers. It is also important to keep in mind that ascribed characteristics of workers, such as their gender and ethnicity, can affect the way in which technological changes have altered their jobs. There is some evidence that early examples of office automation were more beneficial to male rather than to female workers. In the insurance industry, for example, high-level positions in the management of electronic data processing systems became almost exclusively male preserves, while routine clerical work became an increasingly female occupation. A similar pattern was observed in the Internal Revenue Service, where computerization reduced the number of middle-level jobs, thereby blocking advancement opportunities for a largely female clerical staff. These examples indicate that when a labor market is already segmented along gender or ethnic lines, new technologies can reflect or even reinforce existing divisions. One group may benefit from new ways of doing things, while another group may find themselves in the same, or possibly worse, circumstances.

Telework
The differential effects of new workplace technologies can also be seen in the way new computer and communications technologies have been used for work performed away from conventional workplaces. Known as “telecommuting” or “telework,” this mode of labor has grown in recent years. In 2010, more than 34 million American workers—24.4 percent of employed workers—at least occasionally did employment-related work at home. Significantly, women, especially those with children, are more likely to engage in telework than men.
Although it is based on modern technologies such as e-mail, fax machines, scanners, and teleconferencing, telework represents a return to a mode of work that prevailed before industrialization, suburbanization, and new transportation technologies combined to separate the workplace from the home. As we have seen, domestic production prior to industrialization was riddled with problems of motivation and discipline that were ultimately overcome by the development of the centralized factory and its regimen of close supervision. Modern communication technologies have allowed some reversal of this long-term trend. Through telework, workers can avoid expensive, stressful commutes and have more on-the-job flexibility. 
In the past, homes adjoined the workshops of skilled craftsmen, but a home worksite also could be a place where miserably paid workers put in long hours in cramped cottages and fetid tenements. This dismal history caused an initial opposition to modern telework by organized labor. Labor unions also opposed work done in the home because dispersed and easily replaced workers are difficult to organize and recruit. 
Union opposition to telework has softened in recent years with the realization that telework can be beneficial for many workers. Abundant possibilities for exploitation exist when workers are isolated in their individual homes, are dependent on their employers for their livelihoods, and can be easily replaced, but not all work in the “electronic cottage” conforms to this model. Electronic homework need not be confined to such things as routine word-processing tasks. Jobs requiring a high degree of skill and expertise can also be done in the home. It may even be possible for many specialized services to be supplied by homeworkers who are not employees of a firm but work on a contract basis, perhaps as a member of an autonomous teleworkers’ association. At the same time, regular employees who work far from their firm’s central office may not have to be electronically supervised as long as they have a personal stake in the success of the firm. This is more likely to happen when employees occupy upper-level positions within an organization. For these workers, new technologies can make their work more autonomous, convenient, and fulfilling. 
Although telework can bring a number of benefits, workers should understand that a prolonged period of absence from a central workplace, even if it does not result in diminished output, may put these workers at a disadvantage when it comes to pay raises, promotions, and assignment to new projects. Teleworkers may be cut off from vital information, have difficulties forming job-related relationships with other workers, and may be excluded from essential job-related networks. As Joel Mokyr has noted of conventional working relationships, “Proximity in a plant or office created personal familiarity and thus conditions of trust and believability. There is always a role of body language, intonation, and general demeanor in human communications.”In sum, electronic communications technologies can be used for many work-related purposes, but they cannot completely replace “face time” at a workplace. 

Smart Technologies and Dumb Jobs? 
Optimistic students of technological change are fond of pointing out that as computerized processes continue to emerge, a growing segment of the labor force will be found in jobs that require high degrees of skill. Instead of monotonously tightening nuts and bolts or engaging in routine clerical operations, large numbers of workers will be engaged in tasks that cannot be performed by computers. Frank Levy and Richard Murnane have called attention to the many kinds of work activities that cannot be reduced to computer-friendly routines, the abilities and processes that they have dubbed “expert thinking” and “complex communication.” And, as we saw in the previous chapter, even where computers have taken hold, a large number of employees will be required to continually modify organizational structures and operations in order to make optimal use of computer-based technologies. From these perspectives, occupational skill levels are going up, and the unskilled factory operative and office clerk are becoming an anachronism in twenty-first-century enterprises. 
It is undeniable that these trends can be found in many firms, but to less optimistic observers, predictions of the radical upgrading of workers’ tasks are at best premature. Plenty of jobs still require only the most minimal levels of skill and training. The task of monitoring industrial processes can be just as dull as the most routine assembly operation, and in any event, many of these functions can be performed by sensors connected to computers. Even maintenance and repair jobs may represent only a slight improvement in required skill levels. Technological advances can lower maintenance requirements, and when repairs need to be done, they can often be accomplished by simply disconnecting a faulty module and replacing it with a new one. The task of diagnosis, which often requires the greatest amount of the repairperson’s skills, has itself been simplified through the development of special test circuits and computer-based “expert systems.” To be sure, the need for repair skills will always be present, and it is unlikely that technological developments will allow the elimination of repair personnel. Still, any dilution of the repairperson’s skill will have significant consequences for the overall skill levels of the labor force, for these workers comprise the largest single group of skilled workers.
Moreover, even if the optimists are largely correct, their predictions only hold for industries that make extensive use of advanced technologies. High-tech factories and offices may require higher levels of employee skills, but these are not the workplaces of large numbers of workers today or in the near future. Nor will new high-technology industries generate great numbers of new jobs. To be sure, some high-tech occupations have grown rapidly in recent years and are projected to do so in the future. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, from 2010 to 2020 employment in “Computer and Mathematical Occupations” is expected to grow by 22 percent, for a net addition of 778,300 jobs. This represents a healthy rate of growth, but it is more than matched by the 1,443,000 projected new jobs for “Healthcare Support Occupations” (about half of which are expected to be home health care aides), the 1,861,900 additional jobs in the retail trade, and 1,029,500 more jobs in “Food Preparation and Serving Related Occupations” during the same period. In fact, of the 10 occupations with the largest numerical employment increases projected from 2010 to 2020, only two—registered nurses and postsecondary teachers—require much in the way of advanced training. The remainder—occupations like personal care aide, truck driver, and customer service representative—hardly represent the high-tech future. Advanced technologies have given rise to a number of occupations that have grown at a rapid rate from a low base; however, in absolute terms, most of the job growth in the near future will take place in occupations that have been around for a long time. 
Although technological advance does not seem to be the source of large, across-the-board increases in workers’ skills, it doesn’t seem to be producing the opposite effect either. While the skill requirements in some occupations have decreased, they have increased in others, and it is likely that all of these changes have offset one another, leaving no net change one way or the other. It also may be the case that there has been a polarization of workers’ skills as skill requirements have increased in some jobs and occupations and decreased for others. For example, automobile manufacture has changed substantially as a result of the introduction of computer-controlled equipment. This, in turn, has led to changes in the skills exercised by the factory workforce; while skilled workers have experienced upgraded skill levels, the opposite has been the case for production workers. This bifurcation was not the inevitable outcome of technological change, however. The distinction between skilled and unskilled workers has always been a prominent feature in the automobile industry, and in the absence of changes in organizational structure and culture, the introduction of new production technologies reinforced this division by giving skilled workers most of the responsibilities for the operation, maintenance, and repair of technologically sophisticated equipment while leaving ordinary production workers with jobs that continued to require little in the way of skill. 
This is hardly an atypical pattern. As several researchers have noted, organizational patterns strongly influence the skills used by workers. One aspect of organizational structure that may strongly affect workers’ skill levels is the distribution of power. When there is a sharp division between those who manage and those who work, and when managers view their workers as hostile and unreliable, workers will be treated as replaceable parts. Their skill level will be low, and they will be controlled by centralized supervision and machine-paced work processes. By contrast, when a more democratic and egalitarian order prevails, technologies that require the initiative and commitment of workers are more likely to be selected, and workers will be given a chance to develop their skills and take their places as valued members of the organization. 
New technologies can be developed to increase levels of skill, or they can be used to diminish them. Like all matters regarding technology, choices have to be made. These choices emerge in an environment where the intentions and relative power of employees, managers, and the owners of enterprises are usually at least as important as emerging technical capabilities in determining the course of technological change and its consequences for a firm’s workers. 