Chapter 1 introduced the concept of technological determinism, the idea that technology acts as an independent force in human affairs. As we have seen, this perspective has a number of problems, one of them being that it simply takes technological change as a given and fails to consider how new technologies emerge and diffuse. In the first part of this chapter, we will revisit the concept of technological determinism by noting some of its corollaries and considering their strong and weak points. We will then assess the influence of some of the key actors who are directly involved with the process of technological change. To repeat an earlier assertion, technology is a human creation, but at the same time it should be evident that individual men and women have not participated equally in initiating and directing technological change. 

Technological Advance and Cultural Lag
For all of its shortcomings, technological determinism still exerts a lot of influence. One of the places where it shows up is in the theory of “cultural lag.” Formulated by William F. Ogburn, whom we briefly met in Chapter 1, the theory of cultural lag is predicated on the belief that habits, thoughts, values, and social arrangements often fail to change at the same speed as technological innovation. Technology moves ahead, but many other things lag behind. On the face of it, this seems a reasonable concept, and we should have no difficulty in coming up with a number of examples. To take one, the expansion of public health services and modern medical technologies have lowered infant mortality, but people in some parts of the world continue to have large families, due in part to traditional expectations that many children will not survive infancy. Only after several generations, when expectations and practices have “caught up” with the level of technology, will birth rates begin to fall. To take another example—one that has been the source of considerable conflict, litigation, and governmental legislation—the ease of copying and transferring digitized books and music has profoundly undermined traditional notions of intellectual property and the proper means of accessing it. It can be confidently predicted that many years will go by before the legal system catches up.
Appealing as it is on the surface, the theory of cultural lag has its shortcomings. In the first place, technological changes are simply taken as givens, and no attempt is made to delineate how they came to be in the first place. Although traditional histories of technology have conveyed the impression that inventions are carried forward largely by their own internal logic and are little influenced by external factors, this perspective leaves a great deal out of the story. As earlier chapters of this book have indicated, many things that are not technical in nature strongly influence the course of technological change. At the risk of repetition, suffice it to say that technology should not be viewed as an independent source of social change. 
Second, many attempts to demonstrate the connection between technological and social changes present us with the problem of measuring and trying to connect different kinds of phenomena. Technological changes can often be more easily measured than sociocultural changes, making it hard to determine the precise connection between the two. We can easily tabulate the increase in the number of automobiles between 1900 and 1925, but to what extent did widespread car ownership contribute to changes in sexual activity during this period? In similar fashion, we can tabulate the number of television shows with violent programming, but, as we have seen in Chapter 13, determining the influence of these programs on individual behavior is fraught with difficulties. 
Third, at what point can it be said that a society “catches up” with a given technological innovation? New productive technologies have allowed major alterations in the traditional divisions between “men’s work” and “women’s work,” but customs and social arrangements have not completely taken account of this fact. To be sure, there have been significant changes, but at what point can it be confidently said that a complete accommodation has occurred? Then, too, some technological innovations have been followed by rapid adjustments, while in other cases these adjustments occur slowly, if at all. In regard to the latter, the killing power of modern weaponry far exceeds the spears and stones of our Neolithic ancestors, yet we still engage in warfare as a means of resolving our disputes. Obviously, something other than technology itself is affecting the extent of and speed at which particular cultural lags are eradicated. 
Fourth, the theory of cultural lag assumes a unified society and culture, and ignores the economic, political, and cultural divisions to be found in all complex societies. Describing a social phenomenon as an example of cultural lag may therefore be a reflection of the values and preferences of particular groups or individuals.The unwillingness of Amish farmers to use electricity could be labeled an instance of cultural lag, but this assumes that saving labor is a benefit of unquestionable value; those convinced of the sanctity of physical work would not agree. 
Finally, there is a hidden value judgment contained in the concept of cultural lag. Implicit in it is the notion that technology is a progressive, dynamic element in human history, and that social and cultural arrangements are intransigent sources of obstruction. But isn’t it possible that a cultural lag may demonstrate the danger or inappropriateness of a particular technological innovation? Once again it might be noted that just because something is technically possible, it does not necessarily follow that it should be done, or that people should submit to it and make the necessary alterations to their lives. We now have the capability to implant a fertilized ovum into a surrogate mother, who then carries and delivers the baby. Should we replace old-fashioned methods of reproduction with this “improved” technology? 

Technology, Globalization, and Cultural Convergence
The interplay of technological and cultural changes is especially relevant in the globalized era in which we live. As was noted in Chapter 10, advances in transportation and communications have made individuals and the communities in which they live less insular by facilitating the movement of people, goods, cultural elements, and ideas all over the world. Globalization has brought tai chi to Iowa, Delta blues to Japan, and pad thai to Ireland. Cultural change as result of globalization is not a new phenomenon; the music we listen to, the clothes that we wear, the language that we use, and the devices we employ have been strongly influenced by importations from other lands. What has made things different is the speed at which these transfusions occur. As was noted in Chapter 13, there was a time when major battles were fought by combatants who were unaware that an armistice had been declared weeks earlier. Today, even trivial news items are broadcast to the world at the speed of light. It is obvious that technological advances in transportation and communications have helped to create a more interconnected and fast-moving world, but is a truly globalized civilization emerging? Or to put it slightly differently, are all of the world’s societies and cultures converging towards a common model?
The idea that the use of similar technologies results in cultural and social sameness has been around for a long while in the guise of an approach known as convergence theory. Closely associated with a belief in technological determinism, convergence theory argues that the nations of the world are becoming more similar to one another—that is, they are converging—as they make use of the same technologies. For example, running a steel mill or operating an airline does not allow substantial culturally based variations in the procedures employed. Many other examples of technologies requiring a certain kind of structure and mode of action can be cited, but the effects of modern technologies are not limited to particular industries; according to convergence theory, the process is demonstrated by commonalities in educational systems, family patterns, organizational structures, and even preferences in food and clothing as they all move toward a universal pattern. 
In geometry, convergence means that several lines are all moving toward a single point. Convergence theory, however, usually assumes that countries with relatively low technological levels will move toward a point already occupied by technologically advanced countries, most of which have been in the orbit of European culture (Japan being the notable exception). Since most advanced technologies have originated in Europe and North America, other countries will have to adopt Western institutions and culture if they are to make effective use of modern technologies. In other words, convergence really means Westernization. This equation of modernity with Western culture is embodied in the remark of a U.S. senator who, early in the twentieth century, expressed the hope that “we will lift Shanghai up and up, ever up, until it is just like Kansas City.”
This was a prospect that many Chinese did not view with pleasure. Throughout most of their history the Chinese have been wary of foreign importations, and not even the adoption of Communist ideology altered this fundamental attitude. Especially when under the influence of Mao Zedong’s ideology, many Chinese had misgivings about the adoption of foreign technologies. The underlying hostility toward the use of foreign technologies strongly asserted itself during the second half of the 1960s, when China was racked by the internal struggles that went under the name of the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution. Among the victims of the often bloody conflicts that occurred during this period were technical experts who were accused of being captivated by foreign technologies and opposed to the efforts of China’s workers and peasants to develop indigenous technologies. Opponents of the use of foreign technologies also feared that these technologies would be accompanied by unacceptable foreign cultural patterns. Imported technologies, it was feared, inevitably would be accompanied by “bourgeois” habits and “decadent” activities. Elements of this mentality remain today, as authorities have created “the Great Firewall of China” in the hope of blocking outside influences carried over the internet.
China’s concerns about foreign influences have not been unique; throughout the Third World today can be found the apprehension that technologies developed in modern countries will result in the disruption of traditional social and cultural patterns. In some countries these apprehensions have motivated a return to traditional cultural patterns. This has been most notable in Iran, where the social and cultural disruption brought on by rapid economic modernization has led to the resurgence of Islamic fundamentalism. Even in places where the reaction has not been as strong, many have mourned the passing of traditional patterns of life and thought, and their replacement by a social order that rejects established ways in favor of the latest novelties, and where a cold rationality intrudes into all human relationships. 
This has been the fear. But is it really true that technological modernization has to be obtained as a complete package, and that it destroys all existing cultural patterns that are not favorable to it? Although it has been widely accepted, much of the evidence for convergence theory is impressionistic and anecdotal. Rigorous empirical tests are not abundant, and they do not always come to the same conclusion. In support of convergence theory, one study of Korean automobile workers found that exposure to industrial technology produced patterns of behavior and belief that were similar to the patterns exhibited by Italian and Argentinean automobile workers when their countries were at similar levels of industrialization. On the other hand, another study found that the values of individual workers were much more affected by their nationality than the kind of work they did; Brazilian oil refinery workers held values and beliefs that more closely resembled those held by farmers in their country than those held by their occupational counterparts in India or Ghana.
A study by Robert Marsh took up the issue by hypothesizing that economically developed societies would exhibit less variation in the key characteristics of their social structures (form of governance, composition of the labor force, educational institutions, communications media, and so on) than less developed countries.Economically developed countries have more specialization than less developed ones, making social interactions both essential and frequent. These interactions need to be mutually comprehensible and predictable, which necessitates more uniformity. To take a concrete example, a buyer and a seller of some commodity or service need to assume that their transaction will not be affected by differences in their gender, ethnicity, tribal membership, or other “particularistic” identities. This essential uniformity is made possible by similar institutional characteristics across developed countries, such as centralized governments, high levels of school enrollment for girls and women, and widespread consumption of newspapers, television, and other communications media. Marsh’s research found that some less-developed countries resembled more advanced countries in some of their characteristics, such as widespread educational opportunities for girls and women. But his essential finding was that, on the whole, these countries exhibited much more variation than was found in developed countries. In other words, many of the structural elements of a developed country undergo a process of convergence with other developed countries, resulting in a greater degree of uniformity in many key social, economic, and political categories than in less-developed countries. Equally important, the research demonstrated that the extent of uniformity in developed countries increased over time. 
Although the case for convergence theory is plausible on both theoretical and empirical grounds, the role of technological change in promoting the convergence of societies is less certain. It would certainly be a stretch to think of technological change as a universal solvent that dissolves all prior cultural and social patterns so that they conform to the presumed dictates of modern technology. The effects of specific technologies or of technological change in the aggregate are complex in the extreme, and it is simplistic to expect that all of the features of a society will be summarily transformed in accordance with technology’s requirements. In this matter, it is useful to consider the words of David Landes: “Clearly there are no rigid compulsory relationships between a modern industrial economy and the entirety of its complex, multifaceted environment. Rather there is a wide range of links, direct and indirect, tight and loose, exclusive and partial, and each industrializing society develops its own combination of elements to fit its traditions, possibilities, and circumstances.” Every society has its distinctive characteristics, and a particular technology will not necessarily produce the same effects for all that employ it. The actual consequences of a particular technology depend on why people have developed or adopted it in the first place. Having invented gunpowder, the Chinese used it for rockets and primitive cannon, but fireworks became the main application. In contrast, in late medieval Europe gunpowder was eagerly employed as the basis of increasingly destructive weaponry. The uses to which a technology is put depends on history, existing social arrangements, and the distribution of power. 
Similarly, television in the United States as well as much of the world is primarily geared toward entertainment and the desire of advertisers to persuade the viewing public to buy their products. In contrast, authoritarian states have used television to trumpet the achievements of their regime, and a great deal of programming consists of stories that glorify the political leadership. Even when a diffused technology is used for the same goals as in its country of origin, the manner in which the technology is used may still reflect cultural differences. 
Consider baseball in Japan. The game uses the same equipment, bases are 90 feetapart, pitchers have the same repertoire of pitches, and an inning ends when both teams have made three outs. But Japanese baseball reflects some important cultural elements of that country. Players do not argue with umpires, baserunners do not aggressively attempt to break up double plays, it is considered impolite for a pitcher to disagree with the catcher’s pitch selection, and games can end in ties. 
To take another example of only partial convergence, cars throughout the world use the same set of technologies and are similar in the layout of their controls. But as anyone who has driven outside his or her native land will attest, driving styles can vary greatly from place to place. In other cases, imported technologies may be accompanied by parallel behavioral and cultural changes, but these will be confined to a few enclaves that exert little influence over their surrounding society. Medical procedures at elite hospitals in poor countries may be similar to those in the developed world, but these are not available to the bulk of the populace. In sum, the introduction of new technologies may play a significant role in transforming a society, but only in conjunction with organizational, cultural, and other changes, and these usually unfold over a much longer period of time, if at all. 

Experts, Expertise, and the Shaping of Technology
At the end of the sixteenth century the philosopher, essayist, and corrupt government official Francis Bacon formulated a famous maxim: “Knowledge is power.” Since technology is ultimately based on knowledge, it stands to reason that the power to control technology will be wielded by those with the greatest technical knowledge. But is it so simple? Is the possession of the appropriate knowledge a sufficient basis for the exercise of control over the course of technological change? 
During Bacon’s time it might have been possible for a well-educated person to understand most of the basic principles underlying the science and technology of the era. The body of human knowledge was limited, and no intellectual barriers separated laypeople from scientists and technicians. Scientific inquiry was not the exclusive province of professional scientists, so amateurs could make significant contributions. Technological knowledge was more restricted, as many craft secrets were jealously guarded, but there were no intellectual reasons that these could not be comprehended by an outsider. 
The situation today is vastly different. Knowledge has been growing at an accelerating rate of speed. Whereas a mere ten scientific journals existed in the middle of the eighteenth century, there are now nearly 24,000 peer-reviewed scholarly journals published throughout the world, and a university library in the United States can be expected to subscribe to about 5,500 different scholarly periodicals. The great technological achievements of our time are to a significant degree a reflection of the enormous growth of knowledge that has taken place, but at the same time, this “knowledge explosion” has made all of us relative ignoramuses. Even welltrained scientists and technicians have to admit their own limitations when they leave their own field of specialization. In a world in which there is so much to know, nobody knows very much. 
This ignorance can limit the ability of citizens and their representatives to control the course of technological change. Most technologies are built on a base of specialized knowledge; if most people are incapable of comprehending that knowledge, there looms the danger that the direction of technology will be left to the small cadre who are. When public choices depend on expert information, experts and not the electorate will supply and evaluate this information. If this happens on a widespread scale, democracy becomes an illusion. Citizens can do nothing but accept the judgments of experts and hope that they are right. 
But what does it mean to be “right”? Technologies cannot be judged purely according to their technical merit. Their social consequences have to be considered, and when this happens, value judgments often have to be made. These judgments necessarily take the expert well outside the realm of his or her expertise. To illustrate, biologists might agree that a new medical technology is effective in allowing a couple to choose the sex of the child they intend to have. More crudely, in some countries sonograms can be used to identify the sex of a fetus, which may be aborted if it is of the “wrong” gender—that is, female. These may be effective technologies, but should they be used? If they are used, the likely result will be a lopsided sex ratio where boys and men substantially outnumber girls and women. Over time this will result in a very large cohort of men with no hope of ever getting married, and a host of problems for society as a whole. 
Even when an issue seems to revolve solely around technical matters, hidden value judgments have a way of sneaking in. Many sophisticated tools used by experts, such as cost–benefit analysis, achieve apparent precision because they are based on simplifying assumptions that may reveal the analyst’s own preferences. To take the most obvious example, some cost–benefit analyses require the determination of the value of a human life, which has some objective basis, such as expected future earning power, but also may be affected by a government’s interest in promoting life-saving regulations. The Environmental Protection Agency under the presidency of George W. Bush set $6.8 million as the value of a human life. When the Obama administration took over, the figure was raised to $9.1 million. At the same time, the Food and Drug Administration reckoned that a human life was worth $7.9 million, $2.9 million more than the number used at the end of the Bush administration. Meanwhile, the figure used by the Department of Transportation remained the same at $6 million for each life.
Public ignorance of technical matters may also be compounded by the desire of some experts to keep their knowledge secret. An expert can bolster his or her importance by being the sole source of important knowledge. The arcane nature of scientific and technological knowledge makes this inevitable to a certain degree, but experts have been known to draw a veil of mystery over their work in order to enhance their positions. The organizations in which they work have done the same thing. As Max Weber pointed out many decades ago, organizations commonly seek to expand their power and insulate themselves from outside pressures by keeping their knowledge secret. 
In addition to undermining democratic participation, secrecy can also result in bad decisions because it promotes “groupthink.” The only people deemed to be fully qualified experts are those who have access to secrets, and these secrets are accessible only to people within the same tight circle. As a result, everyone involved in a new technological project is an enthusiastic supporter, while potential opponents are excluded from the action. Major decisions can thus be made by a cadre of self-interested enthusiasts who are unchallenged by an informed opposition. The decisions to support the Concorde supersonic airliner and an ambitious atomic energy program in Britain occurred under precisely these circumstances. 
Most experts are employed by organizations that are likely to have a stake in an issue where expert opinion is sought. The commercial value of research has at times created such a close relationship between profit-making enterprises on one hand and scientific and technical experts on the other that free-standing experts are almost nonexistent in some areas of research. To take one notable example, until the practice was banned in 2004, researchers at the National Institutes of Health could receive payments for consulting work from pharmaceutical firms. Close ties, financial and otherwise, between researchers and these firms have also motivated some medical journals to require that contributors divulge these connections when presenting the results of their research. Another example of independent technical expertise being undermined by the experts’ entanglement with other organizations and programs is provided by a software systems analyst who was asked to serve on an advisory panel that was to make recommendations regarding the computer development program for the Strategic Defense Initiative (The “Star Wars” anti-ballistic weapon program): 
I have a project with the U.S. Navy that could profit from SDI funding and I suggested to the panel organizer that this might disqualify me. He assured me quite seriously that if I did not have such a conflict, they would not want me on the panel. He pointed out that the other panelists, employees of defense contractors and university professors dependent on Pentagon funds for their research, had similar conflicts. Citizens should think about such conflicts the next time they hear of a panel of “distinguished experts.” 
Of course, even if some experts are not inclined to challenge technological policies, there may be other persons who will. Ralph Nader, in calling attention to the shortcomings of automobiles in the 1960s, especially in regard to safety or the lack of it, probably has done more to affect their design than any single engineer. Nuclear power has been under assault from a variety of quarters, and it is not likely that the issue will be resolved on the basis of purely technical criteria. Decisions to develop new military technologies can be intensely political. Technical considerations are important but not preeminent, for the decision to develop and deploy a new weapons system usually has significant economic, political, and strategic ramifications.
When major policy decisions are at stake, experts will likely find that their technical knowledge cannot easily be converted into political influence. This can be seen in the usual fate of advisory committees of recognized experts that have been convened by the government in order to address a major scientific or technological issue. A great deal of effort is often expended by these committees, but their recommendations are likely to be ignored if they go against existing policies of the executive branch, expose the administration to political difficulties, or invite the wrath of special interest groups. On occasion, presidents have buried committee reports if they challenge intended policies. For example, in the late 1960s a presidential advisory committee produced a report that was sharply critical of the proposed supersonic passenger airplane, a project strongly supported by the Nixon administration. Faced with this internal opposition, the White House simply kept the report confidential. Members of Congress were not allowed to see it for many months, until one congressman was able to secure the release of some parts of it. This was not an isolated case. The use of confidentiality has prevented other reports from seeing the light of day. When this happens, the public at large may simply assume that the experts’ advice has been followed or that it has been overridden for good reasons. As a result, the scientific advisory system may simply provide a facade that allows the president to legitimize his decisions about science and technology policy. 
In sum, experts are in a position to influence the course of technological change, but at the same time they face many difficulties in converting their knowledge into power. Being free from outside influences and having the correct technical answers aren’t enough; wielding power requires the mobilization of a constituency and the ability to create a broad base of support. Even outside government, technological decisions have the same political character, with the same need for gathering support for projects and policies. This means that except for fairly trivial matters, issues are not settled on the basis of purely technical considerations. 

Engineers and the Control of Technology
To further explore the connection between expertise and the shaping of technological change, we will consider the working lives of the people who are most closely involved with technological innovation: engineers. As we shall see, more is involved in their work than the exercise of purely technical skills. In a modern economy the design and development of new technologies is largely the work of engineers and other technical specialists. It seems natural, then, to expect that a great deal of control over the direction of technological development should be exercised by members of these occupations. Moreover, since so much of our world is shaped by technology, technical experts might be expected to have a powerful influence on society as a whole. 
As we have seen in Chapter 2, some have argued that technocracy, the exercise of political authority by engineers and other technical experts, was the soundest and most rational way to govern. One of the most systematic and influential statements of the virtues of technocracy was the work of a sociologist/economist named Thorstein Veblen, who expounded his ideas during the first two decades of the twentieth century. According to Veblen, engineers and other technical experts were the “indispensable factor in the everyday work of carrying on the country’s productive industry.” But at the same time, “they have nothing to say in the planning and direction of this industrial system, except as employees in the pay of financiers.” It was this contradiction between the technical acumen of the engineers and their subjugation to managerial control that Veblen saw as the greatest obstacle to continued economic progress. The only solution was a takeover of business enterprises by a “Soviet of Technicians” so that the economy would be continuously stimulated by technological advance instead of being retarded by the narrow financial interests of absentee owners and their delegated managers.
Veblen’s ideas provided inspiration for a technocratic political movement that flourished for a brief period during the 1930s and then expired. But the idea that technical expertise should be the proper basis of control did not die with it. Several decades later, a number of social scientists advanced the idea that Veblen’s prescriptions had been achieved; the enterprises of advanced industrial economies were now under the control of engineers and other technologically oriented personnel. For sociologist Daniel Bell, the key personnel in modern corporations were the “corporate organizers,” a “special breed, often engineers, whose self-conscious task was to build a new economic form.” A similar theme was sounded by economist John Kenneth Galbraith in his influential book The New Industrial State. Galbraith argued that the owners of large business firms no longer ran them, as had been the case in the days of the traditional entrepreneur. Instead, the management of modern enterprises was now in the hands of the “technostructure”: managers and engineers with the specialized knowledge and talent essential to planning and decision-making. 
According to Galbraith’s formulations, the members of the technostructure brought a new set of goals to corporations and other productive enterprises. Since they were not the main holders of company stock, they would not be the primary beneficiaries of increased profits. Consequently, the main goal of the new managerial elite was not the maximization of profits. Rather, the technostructure was primarily concerned with maximizing corporate growth and fostering the technological innovations that made this possible. No longer was technological advance held in check by the narrow financial concerns of Veblen’s absentee owners; the administration of productive enterprises by engineers and like-minded managers guaranteed the continual improvement of products and production techniques. Equally important, the decisions of engineers and their intellectual kin determined the general trajectory of the economy and society. 
Many of the assertions presented in The New Industrial State have been largely refuted in the decades following the book’s publication. But one concept is at least worthy of further inquiry. Galbraith’s invocation of the “technostructure” has directed our attention to the role of engineers and other technical experts in the management of modern firms. As subsequent research has shown, engineers as a group are deeply involved in management, but they do not form a technocratic elite, nor, at the other end of the spectrum, are they simply hired hands. 
In understanding the role played by engineers it is important to note that, along with other skilled occupational groups, engineers expect to be recognized as professionals. At the most basic level, the work of a professional centers on the possession and application of knowledge that is found only within the ranks of the profession. This means that someone outside the profession is not qualified to pass judgment on working professionals; only other professionals are able to do so. Consequently, the essence of professionalism is autonomy. This has been evident in the long-established professions, such as medicine and law, where doctors and attorneys have been accustomed to the insulation of their careers from outside forces. In part, this has been due to the fact that, until fairly recently at least, they have been in business for themselves as independent practitioners. But this has not been the case with engineers. Except for a small number of private consultants, engineers have been the employees of an organization, usually some sort of business enterprise. 
While serving as employees, engineers do enjoy a considerable amount of freedom as they go about their work. They are not subject to rigid supervision, and they have considerable discretion regarding how they plan their activities and schedule their work. They have to respond to the requests of management and deal with the problems presented to them, but they have wide latitude in determining how the job is done. At the same time, however, the work of engineers is closely constrained by the expectations of their employers. While they have the freedom to decide how a job is to be done, engineers have little influence over the choice of what is to be done. And, in truth, few engineers are concerned about their lack of influence in the setting of company policies or the purposes to which their talents are being put. The engineer’s training and on-the-job socialization do not produce ambitions of this sort. The work of engineers exemplifies the rational search for the best way of attaining particular ends. But engineers rarely have the privilege of selecting these ends. Indeed, once they do, they no longer act as engineers. 
While engineers are subject to managerial authority, they often exert their own authority by joining the ranks of management. This is a common transition; nearly two-thirds of engineers in the United States become managers during at least part of their career. At the same time, however, the movement of engineers into management has the paradoxical result of further diluting the engineers’ influence. For most engineers, success in one’s career means attaining a managerial position, not being an increasingly proficient engineer. 
Engineering and management require different skills and orientations. As Samuel C. Florman summarizes, “The characteristics of a good manager—a feeling for people, politics and the bottom line—appear to conflict with those of a first rate creative engineer—an aptitude for numbers, theorems, materials, and spatial relationships.” But while orientations and even fundamental values may conflict, with the prospect of a managerial career dangled in front of him or her, a practicing engineer is not likely to challenge managerial values, even when they may conflict with the engineer’s professional values. Expert knowledge and a lifetime devotion to the acquisition and use of that knowledge are central to the professional’s value system; in contrast, businesspersons and managers value loyalty and personal initiative. The prospect of moving from engineering into management can affect a person’s values and undercut his or her identity as an engineer. 
The problems of an engineer influencing company policy are illustrated by the dangers of “whistle-blowing.” A whistle-blower is someone who detects some sort of wrongdoing within his or her organization and brings it to the attention of the public. An engineer can be put in this position when management makes a decision that is so technically unsound or otherwise defective that it poses a threat to the user or to society as a whole. Since an engineer knows the technical facts of a case better than anyone else, he or she is in the best position to reveal whatever problems have appeared.Engineers may be willing to call attention to serious problems because of their conviction that “the facts speak for themselves.” In this they are sadly naive. Most engineers work in organizational settings with strong hierarchical structures. Decisions are made in accordance with vertical relationships; those at the upper levels can countermand those at the lower level, even if the latter have the “facts” in their favor. This is dramatically illustrated by the experiences of some engineers who worked for a major defense contractor. After a chief engineer designed an aircraft disc brake that was woefully deficient in stopping power, he enlisted the support of his superiors in falsifying crucial test data. When a lower-level engineer and a technical writer objected, they were told to keep their mouths shut and participate in the falsification. Subsequent testing by the Air Force revealed the brake’s dangerous shortcomings. Deeply disturbed by the whole process, the dissenting engineer and the writer resigned from their positions. All of the conspirators retained their jobs, except for two who were promoted to higher positions. 
The hierarchical structure of organizations also helps management to control communication; employees are expected to “go through channels.” Facts that pose a challenge to a superior can thus easily be suppressed. The only alternative is circumventing the hierarchy; a concerned employee can attempt to get the attention of officials at much higher levels of the organization, or he or she can reveal malfeasance to the media or some other outside agency. These are risky courses of action. Top-level officials don’t like disturbances of conventional channels of authority, and they are also likely to have doubts about an employee who has gone behind the boss’s back. Revealing a problem to the media or an outside agency is an even worse breach of proper organizational behavior. Loyalty is much prized in organizations, and an employee who is perceived as being disloyal to his or her superior or to the organization as a whole is someone to be scorned. 
The perils of whistle-blowing by an engineer were starkly revealed by the events following the breakup of the Space Shuttle Challenger 73 seconds after it was launched on January 28,1986. A group of engineers from Morton-Thiokol, the manufacturer of the Shuttle’s solid-fuel booster rocket, had warned the night before the launch that cold weather could cause a failure of the O-rings that sealed the segments of the booster rockets. After the erosion of an O-ring resulted in the tragedy that many had feared, Roger Boisjoly, a specialist in seals who had worked on NASA projects for 20 years, used his testimony before the official government board of inquiry to narrate the technical and managerial failures that led to the tragedy. This soon led to his being ostracized and isolated at Morton-Thiokol. Eventually diagnosed as suffering from traumatic stress, Boisjoly left his secure and remunerative job, sold his house, and moved out of the community in which he had lived for many years. Although he earned some income by giving lectures on the causes of the disaster, Boisjoly continued to suffer considerable financial hardship and psychological strain.
The battle of an engineer against his or her organization is likely to be a lonely one. Especially unfortunate is the fact that the professional engineering associations usually are not very helpful to the whistle-blower. These associations have often been dominated by businessmen who are more likely to be concerned with their industry than they are with the career concerns of individual engineers. This is illustrated by the case of Ernest Fitzgerald, who was summarily fired after he had called attention to the huge cost overruns on the Lockheed C5A transport plane. His professional association, the American Institute of Industrial Engineers, spurned Fitzgerald’s request to “investigate the professional and ethical questions involved.” It refused on the grounds that it was a “technical organization,” and not a “professional society.” The inclusion of military contractors as members of the Institute made this a likely outcome. 
From this brief survey, it should be apparent that engineers do not exercise commanding influence over the course of technological change. Their work, while essential to technological development, is constrained by the organizational environment in which engineering operates. The crucial decisions are made by management, and even if engineers are often recruited into its ranks, when this happens they necessarily change their orientations. Managers must be primarily concerned with profit or some other organizational goal; technical virtuosity cannot be an end in itself. If we are looking for a major source of control over technology, we therefore need to look beyond engineers to the organizations that employ them. This will be done in the next chapter.