Mention technological change to some workers, and a cold chill is likely to go down their backs. Lurking behind many an innovation is the threat of a job lost. This is not an irrational fear. Throughout history, and especially in the modern era, many production technologies have been explicitly motivated by the desire to increase productivity. Since productivity is usually measured in terms of output per worker, the consequences of productivity increases seem clear: the reduction or elimination of labor. For example, if worker productivity increases at a rate of 2 percent a year—less than the post-World War II average in the United States—the size of the economy will double in about 35 years. On the other hand, productivity growth can be cast in negative terms by noting that today’s output of goods and services would require only half the number of workers 35 years from now.
While productivity gains have made our material lives much richer, they also have raised the specter of mass unemployment. If a relatively few workers can perform all the necessary labor, large numbers of people will end up with no jobs and no work to do. At least that is the fear. Fortunately, the situation is more complicated. Technology’s effects on employment are substantial, but they also can be contradictory. In this chapter we will trace the complex connections between technological change and unemployment by looking at the historical record, and by considering where the productivity improvements wrought by technological change seem to be leading us. In addition, the chapter will briefly consider how technological change has affected the distribution of income, and will note some of the consequences of globalization, a process that has accompanied technological advance, which also influences employment and worker remuneration.

The Technological Threat in Historical Perspective 
A cursory examination of technological change reveals many examples of jobs lost because of technological advance. In 1920, the American railroads employed 113,000 locomotive engineers and 91,000 firemen. In 2002, these railroads carried a much greater volume of freight but needed only 40,000 engineers and no firemen to do so. During the early 1980s, studio musicians saw recording jobs erode by more than a third as a result of the growing use of musical synthesizers. From 1972 to 1977,21 percent more telephone calls were made throughout the Bell System, yet the number of operators fell by 32 percent. Over a five-year period beginning in 2002, steel production increased by almost 5 percent, yet employment fell 10 percent. During the same period, corn production went up by 30 percent while farm payrolls dropped by about the same percentage. 
Striking as these developments have been, they are not unique to our times. Beginning in the late eighteenth century, the power loom forced many handloom weavers out of their traditional craft, and those who stayed on did so only because they were willing to accept miserably low wages. Many similar examples could be extracted from the history of the Industrial Revolution. The introduction of machinery threatened the livelihood of many workers and produced a considerable amount of social unrest. Attempts to introduce the spinning jenny into the English woolen trade during the late eighteenth century resulted in numerous riots. By the early nineteenth century, worker resistance to new machinery was widespread in several regions of England, culminating, as we saw in Chapter 2, in the machine-smashing Luddite outbreaks. 
Opposition to new technologies because of their consequences for employment has not been confined to the workers whose jobs were threatened. The fear of the effects of new technology on employment has on occasion moved public officials to take drastic actions. In 1638 the British government banned the use of “engines for working of tape, lace, ribbon, and such, wherein one man doth more amongst them than seven English men can doe.” A more extreme (although perhaps apocryphal) example comes from the Polish city of Danzig, where in 1661 the municipal authorities destroyed a mechanical ribbon loom and drowned its inventor, for fearthat the new device would put hand weavers out of work. Consignment to a watery oblivion also was advocated for a mechanical cotton picker by the Jackson, Mississippi, Daily News in the late 1930s: “It should be driven right out of the cotton fields and sunk into the Mississippi River, together with its plans and specifications. Nothing could be more devastating to labor conditions in the South than a cotton-picking machine.”

A Case for Optimism 
Examples, however numerous, do not conclusively prove that technological advance is incompatible with high levels of employment. Although there can be no dispute that particular technological changes have resulted in job losses and attendant personal tragedies, this does not tell the whole story. The effects of technological change are complex, and it is easy to fix upon one particular result and ignore others. Rather than dwell exclusively on the fate of particular industries and occupations, it is essential to consider the larger picture. 
When considering the effects of technological change on the overall level of employment, one thing must always be kept in mind: even if all available technologies were used to their utmost, there would still be plenty of work to do. In many parts of the world today, including many “developed” countries, there are still large numbers of people who lack the basic necessities and amenities of life. More and better food needs to be produced and distributed, more houses built, more clothing manufactured. People need to be educated, healed, and entertained. Even with high levels of affluence, needs and wants do not decrease. When it comes to the consumption of goods and services, it is likely that high levels of consumption do not diminish the desire for still higher levels of consumption; appetite may grow with eating. Although it may not be a particularly noble trait, the desire to acquire more and more is present in most human beings. As a result, progressively higher levels of economic development may generate the need for continued high (or perhaps higher) levels of production. As economists have noted, scenarios of widespread unemployment induced by technological change are predicated on what has been called the “lump of labor fallacy,” which postulates that there is only so much work on hand for a given workforce. But as we have just seen, there is no intrinsic reason that work cannot expand as more people enter the workforce or lose the jobs that they had held. At the same time, however, it has to be recognized that the realization of potential job opportunities will depend on having a labor force with the requisite skills (or the ability to develop them) and a political and economic system able and willing to pay for the work that needs to be done.
The seemingly endless expansion of needs and desires can be seen clearly in the field of medicine. As we have seen in Chapter 7, despite stupendous achievements in medical technology, we find that the monetary and human resources being devoted to health care have increased rather than diminished. Indeed, the rising cost of health care, which now takes more than 17 percent of our gross national income, has become a major social and political issue. New medical technologies have generated new possibilities and new hopes. Instead of accepting sickness and death as the inevitable working of fate or God’s will, we expect that cures will be found and that medical personnel will be available to administer them. It should therefore come as no surprise to find that employment projections indicate that the demand for health-care workers has increased year after year and in all likelihood will continue to do so in the future. 
As this example indicates, technological advances will not lead to job losses if the demand for products and services increases at the same pace as increases in productivity. It is also important to bear in mind that the level of demand is affected by the price of a particular product or service. If productivity increases bring down the cost, more people can afford it, thereby increasing the size of the market for that product. This, in turn, may motivate an employer to take on more workers so that the increased demand can be met. Much of the history of mass production conforms to this pattern, as exemplified by the automobile industry and the interrelated increases in productivity, employment, production, and purchases that began when Henry Ford began to produce large numbers of Model T cars during the second decade of the twentieth century. 
In other cases, lower prices may not result in significantly higher levels of demand, because people will buy only so much of a particular product irrespective of its price. (In the jargon of economists, such a product is “price inelastic”.) Even so, since consumers pay a lower price for this product, they have more money left over to spend on other things. This increases the effective demand for other products and enhances employment prospects in the industries that make them. To be sure, many economists believe that there may be times when aggregate demand will be insufficient because consumers prefer to save the extra money rather than spend it on new purchases. According to many economic historians, this phenomenon of “underconsumption” may in fact have been the underlying cause of the Great Depression of the 1930s. Under such circumstances, governments may have to stimulate demand by increasing their own expenditures, even if this means running budgetary deficits. 
As a final point, it is also important to remember that technological change often generates problems that require that a great deal of work be done. Animal and plant habitats need to be restored, bodies of water require purification, and victims of accidents and pollution need medical care. Many nuclear power plants are nearing the end of their useful lives, and safely decommissioning them will entail years of labor by thousands of workers. In general, the cost of environmental cleanups is hardly trivial; as was noted in Chapter 6, the United States will have to spend billions if dollars each year for many years just to deal with hazardous wastes and old refuse dumps. The funds spent on environmental cleanup and protection can be the basis of many jobs. 

How Technology Creates Jobs 
Fixing upon particular examples of jobs lost to technological advance can lead to a kind of tunnel vision. While some technologies destroy existing human jobs, others produce jobs that had not existed earlier. No one worked as a locomotive engineer before the coming of the railroad, and there was no need for X-ray technicians before the twentieth century. In fact, most of the occupations held today did not even exist a hundred years ago. This trend can be expected to continue. Occupations such as genetic engineer, global positioning system technician, website designer, and social media strategist could hardly be imagined a generation ago, but they will become increasingly significant as the technologies that gave rise to them are developed and deployed. 
While the historical record shows that new technologies can give rise to whole new industries, it is often difficult to determine in advance the occupational consequences of a new invention. When the transistor was invented, it was at first thought that its primary application would be simple substitution: the replacement of vacuum tubes in amplifiers. Because of its small size and low power requirements, the transistor’s first practical application was to make hearing aids more compact and efficient. Today, transistors and other solid-state devices are the foundation of industries unknown a few decades ago—personal computers, smartphones, e-book readers, and MP3 players, to name but a few. 
General technological advance has created a host of new products and the jobs necessary to make them. And in this regard, too, actual events have run well ahead of many predictions. In 1963 one economist warned that American households were saturated with domestic appliances, resulting in a stagnant market for manufactured goods; the only significant new product was the electric can opener.. Today, if he is still alive, the man who made this prediction is likely to live in a house equipped with a big-screen HD television, food processor, microwave oven, Blu-ray player, personal computer, and wi-fi router. These products, all of them virtually nonexistent as consumer items five decades ago, have generated many new jobs in manufacturing, marketing, and servicing. 

The Indirect Effects of New Technologies on Employment 
In the past, a single new technology could be responsible for a large proportion of the new jobs that came into existence. Today’s economy is much more complex, so no one technology is likely to have the same impact. It is unlikely that any recent technological innovation will equal the greatest job generator of the twentieth century: the automobile. Although direct employment in the automobive industry has steadily declined in recent years, the approximately 250 million cars and light trucks on America’s roads provide employment for legions of mechanics, sales personnel, and insurance agents, as well as many workers whose jobs are indirectly tied to the automotive culture and are employed in everything from oil refineries to fast-food restaurants. 
None of the new industries that have emerged as a consequence of recent technological change is likely to match this record. The jet airliner, as emblematic of our present transportation system as the automobile, has not led to the direct creation of many jobs; relatively few people are employed by America’s airlines and passenger aircraft manufacturers. The computer, often hailed as the most significant invention of our age, has not added a great number of manufacturing and service jobs, and many of the former have been relocated to low-wage countries. The same can be said of the television industry, and just about any of the industries that owe their origin to recent technological changes. 
At first glance it looks as though the pessimists have got it right: technological development in established industries destroys jobs, and the occupations created by new technologies do little to offset the losses. But these conclusions follow only if one looks at the specific industries without considering indirect effects on employment. 
Consider the airline industry again. It is true that despite the industry’s dramatic growth in recent decades, employment has gone up only slightly. But at the same time, air travel has stimulated a number of other sectors. Travel and tourism, much of which stimulated by the growth of the airline industry, are now one of the largest sectors of the world economy, accounting for 9.2 percent of global GDP, 4.8 percent of world exports, and 9.2 percent of global investment. The growth of jet-age travel and tourism has brought with it a great many job opportunities in hotels, restaurants, travel agencies, tourist attractions, and the like. Television also has had a considerable, if unmeasurable, impact on economic growth by stimulating a demand for new products and services that are presented on programs and commercials. In similar fashion, the spread of computers into our economy has been essential to the development of new industries, videogames, and social media being the most obvious. All in all, some jobs have been lost as computers increased productivity in clerical, manufacturing, and other occupations, but at the same time new jobs are being created as computers have stimulated the growth of new or existing industries. 
Since the effects of jet aircraft, television, computers, and other advanced technologies are often indirect, their role in job creation is often obscured. It is much easier to take note of those jobs that have been directly eliminated by an emergent technology, for they are dramatic and often well publicized. The indirect effects of technological change on job creation are less easily noted. To take another example, it has been noted that the spread of e-mail and other computer-based communication systems will result in diminished use of the postal system and the loss of jobs for hundreds of thousands of postal workers. This is true to some extent, but at the same time, the rise of e-commerce has increased the use of the U.S. Postal Service and other delivery services for the shipment of parcels. Another consequence of computerization has been a great expansion of junk mail. Not everyone enjoys receiving piles of advertisements and solicitations, but they certainly have kept letter carriers busy, while creating a fair number of new jobs for other people. 

The Machines Aren’t Ready to Take Over 
When people visualize technological change in the workplace, they often conjure up an image of legions of robots doing what people used to do. There is no denying that robots have been making an impact on factory production. In 2008, 1.3 million industrial robots were working in the world’s factories. Moreover, robots are only the final step in a more general process of automating production. Computer-aided design (CAD) systems make it possible to “draw” a design onscreen, change its size and shape, call up stored shapes, and rotate the design to see how it looks from different perspectives. The design can then be tested through the use of computerized procedures. When the design work is completed, the new product can be built by a computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) system, in which computerized instructions run the robots and other machinery that fabricate and assemble the parts that have been designed with the help of computers.. Computerized systems can also be used to organize the manufacturing process by scheduling production, directing the movement of parts, and generally keeping everything under control. 
Industrial computers are also the basis of flexible manufacturing systems that alter the basic rules of mass production. Instead of using special-purpose machines that do only one thing, it is possible to use general-purpose machines that can be quickly reprogrammed to do a variety of things. For example, automobile manufacturers can now rapidly reprogram assembly-line robots to do different welding operations, depending on what is coming down the line, all of which happens in response to a bar code affixed to a rail running below the vehicle. Flexibility of this sort is especially important for the manufacture of products that are made in small quantities or undergo rapid changes in specifications. 
At present, these technologies have appeared piecemeal in most industrial settings; they are “islands of automation” on the shop floor. Over time, it is hoped, they will become part of an integrated system that governs the total manufacturing process from initial design to the testing of the completed product. When this occurs, a great deal of production will take place with very little direct human intervention. 
As exciting as these developments are, the advance of industrial automation will be a slow process. Automated manufacturing systems are very expensive, with each workstation costing up to a million dollars. More important, many technical problems remain unsolved. There are still many difficulties surrounding the transport of materials from one station to another without human intervention. Robots are particularly difficult to adapt to assembly operations, and a lot of hand labor, much of it done in low-wage countries, is still used for assembly operations. Robots and other elements of automated production technology have been eliminating some jobs, but there are limits to how far this process can go. There even have been some cases where robots have been replaced by human workers in industrial settings in which people learn faster, are more flexible, take up less space, and work cheaper and faster.
Manufacturing systems that rely on automated production technologies also operate on the thin edge of disaster. If a robot or other computer-controlled process fails, production comes to a complete halt and everything stacks up behind the obstacle until human workers sort out the problem. Even worse, a small programming error can cause thousands of dollars of damage to machines and material in a few seconds. The challenges of programming, controlling, and maintaining computer-controlled industrial processes have put a high premium on skilled workers, who remain in short supply while other manufacturing workers remain on the unemployment rolls month after month.

Technology, Jobs, and the Changing Structure of the Economy 
Although automated industrial processes have been only partially realized, there is no denying that they have made substantial inroads into manufacturing employment. Robots, computerized controls, and CAD-CAM systems have reduced the need for human labor in many industries, a process that will continue in the years to come. But alarming as this prospect may appear, it is nothing new. Over the last century, many of the jobs performed by manufacturing workers have been lost to mechanization, yet total employment has undergone a massive increase. This has occurred because the bulk of job creation, especially in recent decades, has been not in the production of goods but in the supply of services. In 1950, 18.1 million workers were employed in manufacturing, construction, and raw materials extraction, while 26 million worked in the service sector. By 2012, with 88.9 million additional job holders, these figures were 18.74 million and 114.3 million, respectively. In the 1950s, manufacturing, construction, and raw materials extraction were pillars of the economy; they are still important, but they have steadily declined as sources of employment. As simple arithmetic shows, the number of these jobs has not dropped in absolute terms, but they have fallen sharply relative to service occupations. In 2012, manufacturing, construction, and resource extraction had only 64,000 more jobs than in 1950; for the service sector the number was more than 88.3 million. Even these figures may underestimate the extent to which services have been numerically dominant in modern economies. Many jobs in the manufacturing sector are actually service occupations. Independent consulting engineers provide a service, and are put in this category for statistical purposes, but if they perform similar duties as members of the engineering staff of a manufacturing enterprise, they appear as manufacturing employees. The number of workers performing service-type functions in the manufacturing sector is large and growing, another indication of the changing nature of work. 
Many occupations fall into the service category, and not all of the jobs in this sector of the economy are equally desirable. Shoeshine boys perform a service, just as neurosurgeons do. What many of these varied services have in common, however, is that they incorporate a personal element. This in fact is what makes them desired by consumers who have a surfeit of manufactured goods. For many people, the most sophisticated machine is no substitute for human contact. This desire will likely retard the replacement of human service providers by even the most sophisticated technologies. Computer-based expert systems can do an excellent job of diagnosing certain illnesses, but they fall short in providing a significant element in recovery from many illnesses—a patient’s confidence in the services provided by a skilled medical practitioner. 
The desire for services shows no signs of abating, and this sector will generate many future jobs. Still, relying on services to drive the economy and provide jobs seems to violate common sense. The basis of human survival is food, clothing, shelter, and the implements necessary to sustain life. How can the majority of the work force be employed in occupations that directly contribute nothing to production? In fact, much economic progress can be interpreted as an ongoing reduction of the number of workers employed in producing the necessities of life. Two hundred years ago, more than half of the population of Europe earned their livelihood by growing food, just as is the case in many poor countries today. With the rise of industrialization and the provision of such things as irrigation pumps, mechanized farm implements, and chemical pesticides and fertilizers, the labor requirements of agriculture steadily dropped, until today less than 5 percent of the work force in most industrial countries is engaged in farming. The same thing could happen in manufacturing in the years to come. 
The displacement of agriculture by industry was closely tied to the rapid progress of technology during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. In the case of the service sector, however, modern technologies are often conspicuous by their absence. This is a major reason for the slow growth in productivity that has been characteristic of the American economy in recent years. While manufacturing employees have made much use of machines that embody increasingly sophisticated technologies, many service occupations have been only lightly touched by them. As a result, the desire for more services can be met only by employing more workers.
According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, between 2006 and 2016 more than half a million production jobs, most of them in the manufacturing sector, will have been lost, while another 29,000 jobs are projected to disappear in farming, fishing, and forestry. All of the net employment gains will come in the service sector. Some of these will be high-paying jobs that require a college degree or higher, but many others will be poorly remunerated, relatively low-skill jobs: home care aides, medical and dental assistants, janitors and cleaners, and short-haul truck drivers. 
Perhaps the clearest example of the labor-absorbing quality of services can be found in education. Despite efforts to use computers, audio-visual aids, and machine-scored exams, teaching is conducted much as it was in the time of Socrates: through lectures and discussions, both of which require some degree of personal contact. Since much of the appeal of a service has to do with the human contact it provides, the more “productive” a service job is, the less satisfying it may be for the consumer. A teacher could greatly increase his or her productivity by lecturing to a class of 500 rather than 25, but most students would find so “productive” a class much less enjoyable, and the lack of personal attention would probably result in lowered levels of learning for many of them. It is also significant that one of the most successful online educational programs, the Khan Academy, is most effective when students have the opportunity to interact on a face-to-face basis with human teachers who go over students’ homework, monitor their pro-gress, and help them with any difficulties they may have encountered. To be sure, a good many services have experienced sizable productivity gains through the introduction of labor-saving technologies. The classic example of this can be found in the telephone industry. If telephone calls were still manually switched as they were in the 1920s, today’s level of telephone traffic would require no fewer than 50 million operators. Although the impact may not be as profound, it is likely that many of today’s services will also experience technologically induced productivity gains and corresponding drops in employment. E-mail, word processing, automated banking, and the like have undoubtedly caused job losses, and will continue to do so. But does this mean that unemployment will necessarily increase? Here, again, the example of the telephone industry may be relevant. Some actual, and millions of potential, jobs were lost due to the introduction of automatic telephone switching, but total employment in the telephone industry continued to rise because increased levels of demand stimulated the industry’s expansion. Equally important, the expansion of telephone communications has acted as a powerful stimulant to the economy as a whole, leading to the creation of many jobs that would not otherwise exist. The job-creating qualities of a new technology are usually hard to predict in advance, but they are there all the same. 

Technology and the Distribution of Income 
At this point it can be fairly argued that the creation of new jobs through technological change is not the whole story; also in question is the nature of the jobs created, and in particular, how well they pay. In this regard, the record of recent years has been mixed. On the one hand, technological change has resulted in the emergence of many new, high-paying occupations and business opportunities. On the other hand, technological change has been implicated in diminished economic opportunities and an overall reduction in wages for significant portions of the labor force. 
One group that has seen a reduction in wages relative to the rest of the labor force is composed of workers with only a high school education or less. Technological change is surely a culprit here, as mechanization has eliminated many jobs that a generation ago paid decent wages while requiring few skills. For the economy as a whole, the loss of these jobs has not resulted in widespread unemployment, because the loss has been offset by large employment increases in the service sector. But this is not all there is to it, because compensation (wages and benefits) in service-sector jobs on average is not as remunerative as in manufacturing jobs, although there is wide variation within the former.
By contributing to the drift from manufacturing to service-sector employment, technological change has been linked to one of the most troubling economic and social trends in the United States today, the growing wealth and income gap that separates the top stratum of the population from everybody else. This situation has intensified in recent decades; in 1975 the top 20 percent of American households accounted for 40.7 percent of the income received in the United States. By 2009 their share had climbed to 50.3 percent. The shift from manufacturing to services has not been the only reason for the widening income gap; many other social and economic changes have contributed: changes in family structure, economic globalization, reductions in government benefits for the poor, increased immigration, stagnant minimum wages, and the erosion of union power, to name a few.
Although it is likely that technological change has exacerbated wage inequality, a precise reckoning is still a matter of debate. Assessing technology’s contribution to the skewing of the distribution of income is difficult because much of it operates indirectly. In some cases the consequences of technological change are straightforward; a single computer programmer designs an automated system that results in job losses for a dozen reasonably well-paid assembly-line workers. But many other effects of technological change are more subtle. The installation and use of technologically sophisticated operations is not simply a matter of replacing manual workers with robots and other computer-controlled devices and processes. Realizing the potential of digital technologies often requires a fundamental restructuring of a firm’s organizational structure and operations. As Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee summarize, “The most productive firms reinvented and reorganized decision rights, incentive systems, information flows, hiring systems, and other aspects of organizational capital in order to get the most from the technology.” As a result, the high earners are not just the technically proficient members of the labor force but also include well-educated men and women with a broad range of aptitudes and skills.
The effects of technological change on jobs and remuneration are particularly evident when we focus on specific segments of the labor force. To take one obvious example, technological change can make life very difficult for older workers, especially those with limited skills. The fact that technological change may have increased economic opportunities overall is no comfort to a veteran auto worker who was displaced from a well-paying job by a robot welder. Although qualified workers will be needed to program and repair the robot, such jobs are not likely to go to the former auto worker. They may go to his son or daughter, but for a mature worker with obsolete skills, the future is bleak unless training programs and some form of income supplement can help him through a difficult period of transition.
The difficulties encountered by many older workers with obsolescent job skills are not confined to them alone. The job losses suffered by older workers will be a growing problem as the population of the United States collectively ages; whereas there were 63 million men and women aged 55 or older in 2002, by 2025 there will be a projected 103 million of them. The situation is not altogether dire; although older workers are sometimes stereotyped as being difficult to re-train, several studies have shown that this is not the case. The biggest impediment to equipping older workers with new skills may not inhere in the workers themselves, but rather stems from the erroneous belief that old dogs can’t learn new tricks.

echnology, Globalization, and Jobs 
The loss of jobs as a result of technological change is an old story. A more recent source of job losses has been economic globalization—in particular, the offshoring of manufacturing jobs to low-wage countries. Much of this has been the work of multinational corporations (MNCs). The availability of low-wage labor in the poor countries of the world is often cited as the primary reason for moving jobs abroad, but it is not the only one; MNCs may have operations in other countries because they want to be close to important markets, insulate themselves from currency fluctuations, reduce transportation costs, and avoid tariffs and other trade barriers. Access to cheap labor is undoubtedly an important motivation for transplanting jobs to a poor country, but the advantages of a low-paid workforce may be offset by other costs. A successful offshore operation requires adequate communication and transportation infrastructures, trainable workers, and at least minimally effective and honest governments. If cheap labor were all that mattered, all of the world’s manufacturing would be done in sub-Saharan Africa.
Although technological change and the offshoring of jobs are separate phenomena, they are closely related. Technological change in the form of shipping containers and intermodal transport systems has dramatically lowered the cost of transporting manufactured items from low-wage countries to consumers abroad. A typical case of intermodal transportation begins with a manufacturing plant loading its products into shipping containers, which then travel by truck to a port where the containers are loaded onto a ship that may take the products halfway around the world. The containers are then put on railroad flat cars bound for a distribution point, where they are offloaded onto trucks that take them to their final destination. Through this process, the costs of loading, unloading, and reloading crates and boxes are eliminated, and losses due to the effects of weather, damage, and pilferage are greatly reduced. 
While improved technologies have lowered the time and expense of the transportation of physical goods, the rapid advance of digital technologies has made it possible to transfer information at close to the speed of light—company memos, contracts, technical diagrams, legal briefs, market reports, and anything else that can be digitized. This has made it possible to offshore some activities requiring expert knowledge, such as interpreting lab tests, as well as some requiring minimal skills, such as processing bill payments and staffing call centers. As of now, however, job losses due to moving white-collar work to low-wage countries have been less evident than the loss of manufacturing jobs to these countries. Many information-related occupations will likely remain in the industrially developed world because they require a fair amount of face-to-face interaction and relationships based on trust. And even when some elements of the job can be reduced to digitized communications, as has been noted above, it will still be necessary to employ creative, well-educated workers to initiate, guide, oversee, and evaluate the kinds of changes that are essential to the realization of the potential advantages of digital technologies.
In sum, economic globalization has brought benefits by lowering the price of goods, facilitating the diffusion of modern technologies, and in general opening up the world to new ideas and ways of doing things. But it has had its unfortunate consequences as well. Throughout the developed world, empty steel mills, abandoned factories, and depopulated communities bear witness to industries and jobs lost to foreign competition. As with technological change, with which it is closely connected, economic globalization has created winners and losers. Manufacturing workers have been particularly hard hit as their jobs have been outsourced to countries with cheaper labor or other inducements. As we have seen, there is no inherent reason that technological advance should lead to long-term unemployment, and the same can be said of economic globalization. Both create new opportunities, but adjustments will not come automatically. As will be noted in the next section, matching job skills to these opportunities will require the implementation of appropriate policies in the private and public sectors.

Rebounding from Job Losses
A general optimism regarding the consequences of technological change for employment should not obscure the fact that adjustments will not be smooth and automatic. There will always be a need for purposive action if technological change is not to result in a great number of individual tragedies alongside a general economic advance. 
In fact, there have been few effective programs to mitigate the inevitable destruction of some jobs by technological advance. When the necessary adjustments have been made, they have been done on an ad hoc basis. A few unionized workers have been able to nullify the job-destroying effects of technological advance by striking advantageous bargains with their employers. For example, locomotive firemen were left with little to do when the diesel-electric replaced the steam locomotive, but they were able to negotiate contracts that preserved their jobs for many years. Make-work schemes, however, do not address the real problem of technologically induced job loss. Most people seem to have a real need to work, and to do work that has some intrinsic meaning. At the same time, as has been noted, technological change has not eliminated the need for work. The problem, then, lies in putting the two together by preparing workers whose jobs have been eliminated by technological change to take on jobs for which a real need exists. In an era of rapid technological change there is a fundamental need for retraining programs that help displaced workers learn new skills and prepare them for new jobs. 
Unfortunately, current training programs in the United States have not been up to the task. Although federal, state, and local governments have a number of job training programs in place, they are still restricted in scope and scale. In part this is due to the chronic underfunding of such programs, resulting in their inability to meet demand for them. But even with adequate funding, formal training programs can do only so much. The most effective training programs focus on skills used in a worker’s current job. In general, however, the private sector has failed to take a leading role in improving workers’ skills because employers fear that their workers will use their newly acquired skills to obtain better-paying positions elsewhere. The reluctance of employers to pay for retraining also results from tax policies. Some states offer a tax credit in return for incurring some training costs, and the federal government awards tax credits for the training of targeted employees such as veterans, but tax credits and deductions are more generous for investments in physical capital than they are for human capital. At the same time, many workers fail to take advantage of the retraining programs that do exist because these programs do not take into account workers’ skills and competencies. Many of the jobs eliminated by technological advance have been held by unskilled workers with limited education. A basic remedial program may thus be an essential component of a successful retraining program. And, sad to say, many young people are entering the labor force with serious deficiencies in essential reading and mathematics skills. Workers operating at these low levels are especially likely to be victimized by technological change, and it will be a major challenge to help them develop the skills that allow them to adjust to a technologically dynamic economy. 

Benefits, but Disruption Too 
All in all, the fear that technological advance will lead to widespread unemployment seems unwarranted. Technological change does eliminate specific jobs, but it does not eliminate work itself. While some occupations are rendered redundant by new products and processes, others are being created. To be sure, this is cold comfort to mature workers who have been replaced by new machines. They may find work in America’s expanding service sector or even in businesses that have been created by recent technological advances, but in all likelihood they will suffer a cut in pay. Even those who land good jobs may do so at the cost of considerable dislocation. Technological change often results in the rise of some geographical regions and the decline of others. Eighty years ago the rise of the automobile industry stimulated the rapid expansion of the Detroit area. In recent years the development of the semiconductor industry has produced substantial growth in northern California’s Silicon Valley. Taking advantage of new job opportunities may require pulling up stakes and moving to an unfamiliar part of the country, leaving friends, family, and community behind. 
There is no getting around the fact that technological change can be a painful, disruptive process. Occupations rise and fall, and with them the fortunes of many individual people. There are spectacular winners and pathetic losers. Special efforts must be made if the latter are not to be ruined by the advance of technology. Technological change may destroy a career in which one has invested his or her whole life. It would be irresponsible and cruel to turn a blind eye to the needs of workers displaced by technological advance. 
At the same time, it would be foolish to attempt to limit the development and spread of new technologies for fear of massive job losses. Far from being the product of technological advance, unemployment is much more likely to occur during periods of technological stagnation. One British labor historian has estimated that during the late seventeenth century, half the population of England were paupers because there was not enough work for them to do. This situation began to change only when a series of technological changes helped to produce the Industrial Revolution. After two centuries of technological advance significant numbers of people are still dogged by poverty and unemployment, but there is no denying that things are much better than they once were. Certainly our situation stands in stark contrast to the more technologically backward parts of the world, where vast unemployment and the poverty that accompanies it are the order of the day. 
This, however, is not the end of the matter. Although technological advance has expanded employment opportunities for millions of people, it still can be argued that it has led to the degradation of the work they do. People may have jobs, but they are dreary, alienating, and unrewarding. In the next chapter we will try to determine if this is really the case. 