One of the most common beliefs about technology is that it is simply “applied science.” There are certainly many examples that can be cited in support of this view. Modern medical practices have been strongly influenced by fundamental discoveries in biology. The development of the transistor depended on a thorough understanding of quantum mechanics. Synthetic materials have been made possible by research into polymer chemistry. But one should not be content to rest with these examples. When the full spectrum of technological advance is considered, it becomes evident that science does not always play the decisive role in the development of technology. Indeed, many are the times when technological advances have taken place without the benefit of scientific knowledge. Conversely, on some occasions scientific advance has depended on prior technological achievements. In this chapter we will look at the complex and shifting relationships between science and technology in order to come to a better understanding of how they differ, as well as the ways in which they have influenced each other.

The definition of technology that was offered in the first chapter stressed that technology is based above all on the application of knowledge. But not all knowledge need be derived from scientific research. It is certainly true that today much of the knowledge required for technological advance is derived from scientific inquiries. Still, when the full history of technology is surveyed, it is apparent that most technologies have been developed and applied with little scientific input. The ancient Greeks made important contributions to many sciences—most notably astronomy, optics, and acoustics—as well as producing major advances in mathematics. Greek technology also progressed through innovations in agriculture, building construction, mining, the refining of metals, and military equipment. Yet none of these innovations drew to any significant degree on Greek science. Moreover, the Greeks’ technological achievements were far less impressive than their scientific achievements, again indicating the lack of connection between the two. This lopsided pattern of development continued with the Romans, although in reverse. Roman contributions to science were minor, while Roman engineering (manifested in such things as the construction of great aqueducts) reached a high level of development. In any event, Roman technology had little to do with science.
The European Middle Ages was a time of slow but significant technological advance. Improved agricultural practices were introduced, and the power of wind and falling water was used for everything from grinding grain to polishing metal. An effective horse collar allowed the literal harnessing of another important source of power. Soaring cathedrals were built in many parts of Europe, where they continue to be a source of awe and inspiration. Again, these achievements owed nothing to the scientific inquiries of the time. In fact, the designers and builders of the cathedrals apparently did not even have knowledge of multiplication tables. Then, too, there was little that technology could have drawn on, for medieval science exhibited little of the dynamism of medieval technology.
At about the same time, blacksmiths in parts of the Middle East were using steel superior to anything made in Europe. The swords and other edge weapons that they made from the steel first produced in Damascus (the capital of presentday Syria) combined a hard cutting edge with the flexibility necessary for an effective weapon. Yet it was only late in the twentieth century that the metallurgical principles underlying Damascus steel were discovered. Although it was unknown to the swordsmiths of the time, minute quantities of impurities, vanadium especially, made an essential contribution to the unseen processes that gave the steel its desired qualities. Consequently, when the composition of imported iron ore changed, the steel made from it lacked the desired characteristics. Unable to draw on modern metallurgical knowledge, traditional swordsmiths could not make the necessary adjustments, and the “secret” of Damascus steel was lost for centuries.
This disconnect between scientific and technological development continued during the succeeding centuries. The sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were the scene of epochal advances in science, yet technological change occurred at a slower rate than it did during the preceding centuries when science had been largely stagnant. In similar fashion, early nineteenth-century France boasted the most advanced science in Europe, yet its technology was no more advanced than that of England, its scientific inferior. In some key areas, such as mechanization and steam power, France lagged well behind England. This historical record has led one historian of science, Thomas Kuhn, to speculate that for the bulk of human history, technology has flourished in societies where science has remained undeveloped, and vice versa.4 It is possible that our era is unique in its apparent ability to simultaneously support scientific and technological advance.

Even today, when the connection between science and technology is much stronger than it was in the past, a great deal of technological change takes place without substantial inputs from science. The relative unimportance of science for many technological developments was highlighted by a study that was conducted by the Defense Department in the mid-1960s. Dubbed Project Hindsight, this study assessed the extent to which pure scientific research was essential to the development of 20 major weapons systems. In conducting their study, the Hindsight researchers began with a weapon system and traced its history backward in order to determine the key “events” that produced the knowledge that had been essential to its creation and development. The results of the study gave little credence to the commonly accepted view that scientific knowledge is the primary basis of technological development. Of the 710 events surveyed, only 2 were the result of basic scientific research, a minuscule 0.3 percent of the total.5 Scientific research that was specifically directed toward a particular military project was of greater importance, accounting for 6.7 percent of events, while 2 percent were the result of scientific research directed toward commercial or nondefense needs. The greatest portion of events, the remaining 92 percent, owed little to concurrent scientific research, and relied almost entirely on established concepts and principles. 
Nearly 40 years later, a group of researchers conducted a similar study dubbed Project Hindsight Revisited, in which they surveyed the processes involved in the design of the Apache helicopter, the Abrams battle tank, the Stinger antiaircraft missile, and the Javelin antitank missile. Although the researchers did not attempt to determine the role of basic scientific research in the design of these weapons, their report noted that most of the relevant research had been done well before these projects were initiated, and that very little basic research was done in order to address specific design issues.
Similar conclusions emerged from a research project that was conducted in England. This study examined the winners of the Queen’s Award for Industry, which is given to British firms that have distinguished themselves by initiating technologically innovative products and processes. The study found that very few of these innovations were directly connected to basic scientific research. Accordingly, the authors concluded that “the great bulk of basic science bears only tenuously if at all on the operations of industry.”
Although they show that technology’s connection to science is not as straightforward as is often assumed, one should not draw sweeping generalizations from these studies. The authors of the original Hindsight study, as well as a number of its critics, were quick to note that the long-term influences of scientific research were not captured by the study’s methodology. Project Hindsight considered only the effects of scientific research conducted for the most part after 1945, thereby removing from consideration the immense body of scientific knowledge that had accumulated before that time. The study’s researchers found that a median delay of nine years separated the completion of a scientific research project from its application, even when research efforts targeted at specific technological missions were included. It was therefore not surprising that basic scientific research had few technological consequences during the 20-year span covered by the study.
By taking a longer chronological view, another study, entitled Technology in Retrospect and Critical Events in Science (TRACES), contradicted the previously cited studies by determining that a number of innovations, ranging from oral contraceptives to videocasette recorders, were directly tied to prior scientific research.9But even here, the researchers were obliged to point out that the sequence from scientific discovery to technological innovation is not linear, and that “a better understanding needs to be achieved concerning the two-way influence between science and technology.”
This theme was elaborated by critics of Project Hindsight and TRACES, who noted that both of these studies assumed linear processes in which scientific discoveries preceded technological applications.11 However, as will be explored later in this chapter, the relationship can be inverted, with technology serving as a stimulus for scientific inquiry. On many occasions, the development and application of particular technologies have raised questions that the science of the time could not answer. In successfully addressing these intellectual puzzles, researchers have made important contributions to the advance of science.

If nothing else, these studies show that the connection between science and technology is not adequately captured by the common belief that technology is simply applied science, and that scientific discoveries quickly and easily give rise to technological applications. Some technologies draw directly on scientific research, while others make little use of it. This is rather obvious. Of greater significance is the fact that science and technology are quite different in their basic natures. This makes the translation of scientific knowledge into technological application a difficult and complex process.
Whereas science is directed at the discovery of knowledge for its own sake, technology develops and employs knowledge in order to get something done. The content of the knowledge may be rather similar, but different motivations underlie its pursuit and application. Here, of course, we are on slippery ground; it is often extremely difficult to discern the motivations underlying a person’s activities, and it may well be the case that a particular engineer may be driven by the same desire to understand something for its own sake that animates the work of a pure scientist. Motives are often mixed and complex.
Much of the prestige accorded to science is the result of its supposed purity; science is thought to be an intellectual venture free from political, organizational, and economic constraints. The insulation of scientists from the demands of their patrons confers a sense of higher ethical standards; scientists are beholden to nothing but the internal demands of science. A great deal of recent scholarship has sharply questioned this assumption. As has been the case with recent studies of the history of technology, science has been described and analyzed as a social construction. From this standpoint, scientific inquiry is not a disinterested, fact-driven search for truth, but a human creation that has been shaped by cultural patterns, economic and political interests, and gender-based ways of seeing the world.13 For uncompromising social constructivists, successful scientific outcomes may have more to do with negotiation, the support of designated authorities, and resonance with prevailing attitudes than theoretical elegance or experimental evidence.
The social construction of science remains controversial, and, in any event, few social constructivists believe that scientific facts and theories are purely social creations that have nothing to do with underlying realities. Moreover, social constructivism is a largely academic enterprise, and most laypeople still believe in the objectivity of science and the purity of scientific motives. These qualities give individual scientists a claim to autonomy not enjoyed by other employees. Scientists are thus in a particularly favorable situation. The assumption that scientific progress leads to material progress confers an aura of practicality on their work, while at the same time they are in a good position to resist the overt control of their work by their sponsors.
In contrast, most engineers work under tighter constraints. Their employers expect results that have immediate applications and fall within a narrowly defined range of possibilities. A scientist may abandon a theory or an experiment in order to pursue a line of inquiry that unexpectedly arises during the course of his or her research. An engineer, however, rarely has this opportunity; there may be some room for serendipity, but the bridge has to be built within a given time frame and under definite budget constraints. For this reason, what separates scientific and technological inquiries may not be the motivations of individual practitioners but the motivations of their employers and patrons.
Technology also differs from science in the type and depth of knowledge that is required. The ultimate question asked of scientific knowledge is “Is it true?” For technological knowledge, the key issue is “Will it work?” Technological problems can often be solved with no understanding of what is going on. As we have seen, throughout history many technologies were effectively applied even though the basic principles underlying their operation were poorly understood, if they were understood at all. A similar situation can be found today; high-temperature (which in this case means 130 K or minus 418°F) superconducting materials are beginning to be used in motors and other devices, even though the physics of the process remains something of a mystery. It is also instructive to consider the story of the great scientist Johannes Kepler (1571–1630), who developed and employed the calculus of variation in order to derive optimum dimensions of beer kegs—only to discover that these dimensions were already being employed by the coopers who actually built the kegs!
Many other technological innovations seem to fall into this pattern. Although scientifically derived principles may emerge after the fact, many technologies have been guided almost exclusively by trial and error, with the successful ones informed by an intuitive sense of the right solution, and not by scientific truths. As Eugene Ferguson has observed, at the end of the nineteenth century there were no scientific principles that could be invoked during the design of the first motorcycles; the placement of the engine, fuel tank, and other major components could be determined only through the actual construction and operation of motorcycles, without the benefit of scientific principles or other forms of existing knowledge. Ferguson therefore makes the point that “there is often no a priori reason to do one thing rather than another, particularly if neither had been done before. No bell rings when the optimum design comes to mind.”

Although we tend to think of science as the leading factor in technological advance, the reverse often occurs: scientific knowledge and discovery may be a byproduct of technological achievements, as when fundamental advances in biology and chemistry were stimulated by the successful efforts of Pasteur, Lister, and Koch to solve practical medical problems.17 There also have been cases where a technology already in operation defied accepted scientific explanations and stimulated the formulation of new theories. This process is exemplified by the story of how the steam injector contributed to the abandonment of a popular scientific theory regarding the nature of heat.18 In the mid-nineteenth century, many scientists believed that heat was the result of the presence of a substance known as “caloric.” 
According to this theory, when caloric combined with other materials those materials became hot. Also, caloric particles were supposedly self-repellent; thus, when sufficient quantities of these particles came into contact with water, their repulsive quality resulted in water turning into steam.
While this theory had its uses, it could not explain the operation of the steam injector that was patented by Henri Giffard in 1858. The injector used steam from the boiler to lift water into it, an operation that seemed to mimic perpetual motion for those who subscribed to the caloric theory. In fact, Giffard, who was well-trained in academic science, based his injector on the Bernoulli principle, which postulated that the pressure of a fluid (in this case steam) drops as its velocity increases. The operation of the injector was therefore the result of expanding steam producing a partial vacuum that sucked water into the boiler.
Giffard’s injector was no perpetual motion machine; it used a quantity of heat that was equal to the quantity of work expended in raising water into the boiler, plus the losses due to radiation and contact with surrounding surfaces. Its operation therefore made sense only when the interconvertability of heat and work was understood. This idea rested on the kinetic theory of heat, and it followed the first law of thermodynamics (which stipulates that, quantitatively, energy cannot be created or destroyed). The kinetic theory of heat was formulated several years before Giffard’s invention but had been slow in winning acceptance. The rival caloric theory had many adherents in the scientific community, and it took the apparent anomaly of the injector to convert many of them to the now universally accepted kinetic theory of heat.
The steam injector illustrates the often subtle interactions between science and technology. The operation of the injector provided a strong stimulus for the acceptance of one scientific theory and the rejection of another. At the same time, another scientific theory had been essential to the invention of the injector. But scientific theories by themselves were not enough; the design and effective use of the injector still depended on the experiments and modifications performed by practicing engineers, for no set of theories was powerful enough to guide its design. 
Again, we have an example of a technology that worked even though existing scientific principles did not completely explain its operation.
This example and many others that could be cited indicate that science and engineering are still separate enterprises, although there are certainly linkages between them. Scientific knowledge can result in technological advances, while at the same time many technologies create both opportunities and motivations for new scientific inquiries. Many technological developments reach a plateau due to a lack of scientific knowledge, thereby generating a clearly perceived need for fundamental scientific research. The knowledge obtained through technological practices and applications is thus the raw material of many scientists, whose work centers on explaining technological practices at a deeper level.19One example of this process is the invention of the laser. During World War II the United States and other countries were engaged in a major effort to develop radar as a means of detecting enemy ships and aircraft. While participating in the development of radar technology, scientists used the knowledge that they had gained to make significant advances in microwave spectroscopy, which allowed a more accurate determination of molecular structures. One of the main developers of microwave spectroscopy, Charles Townes, although nominally a physicist, continued to work on technologies for the generation of microwaves. In 1954 he and his co-workers created a device they called the “maser” (for “microwave amplification by stimulated emission of radiation”). In 1958 he and a former student published a paper that outlined how the principle of the maser could be extended into the region of infrared, visible, and ultraviolet light. These ideas were the foundation for the laser (the acronym for “light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation”). 
At first the laser was the classic example of an invention looking for an application. But in succeeding years, the laser became the basis for a host of technologies ranging from scanners used at checkout counters to devices used for the surgical rejoining of detached retinas. In short, the development of one technology (radar) gave rise to scientific advance (the determination of molecular structures through microwave spectroscopy) and at the same time provided a scientific foundation for a entirely new technology (the laser).
As this example indicates, the relationship between science and technology, far from being linear, may be one characterized by considerable back-and-forth movement. This feedback between science and technology may be a fundamental source of their dynamism21 This reciprocal relationship can be seen in the highest accolade for scientific achievement, the Nobel Prize. Although there is no prize for technology per se, a large portion of the prizes for chemistry, physics, and medicine have in fact been awarded for the invention of new devices and techniques. Some of them eventually resulted in commercially viable products, while others were used for further scientific inquiries. In sum, when science and technology have gone their separate ways, as has been the case for most of human history, they develop more slowly than when they interact with each other, as they have done to an increasing degree during the present era.

Technology’s role in stimulating scientific advance does not end with the provision of data, problems, and research opportunities. Technological development also plays a vital role in scientific advance by supplying devices and instruments that are essential for scientific inquiry. From early telescopes and galvanometers to today’s electron microscopes and computers, the products of technology have steadily increased our ability to observe and analyze the phenomena that science takes as objects of inquiry.23 To take only a few recent examples, the scanning tunneling microscope has allowed a much better imaging of plant and animal cells; the Hubble space telescope has given us new insights into the age and size of the universe and how it was created; particle accelerators have enabled physicists to obtain a better understanding of the basic constituents of matter; and magnetic resonance imaging has played a key role in the rapid development of neuroscience, the study of the brain and how it functions. It is thus no exaggeration to claim that scientific “instruments shape research, determine what discoveries are made, and perhaps even select the types of individuals likely to succeed as scientists.”
There is a final and less immediately evident contribution that technology has made to scientific progress. Although an effort has been made here to demonstrate that science has not always been decisive in the development of new technologies, the opposite is widely believed. To a significant degree, this faith in the practical consequences of scientific research has given science the immense prestige and legitimacy that it enjoys today. Many areas of scientific inquiry have become increasingly expensive propositions. To take two admittedly extreme examples, the James Webb Space Telescope, which is slated to replace the Hubble Space Telescope in 2018, is expected to cost $8.7 billion over a 5-year period, while Europe’s Large Hadron Collider carried an initial price tag of $4.9 billion. Neither of these projects isexpected to generate technological spinoffs, but many other research programs would die for lack of funding without the promise of some practical paybacks. Over the years, quite a lot of sophisticated and expensive biological research that has been justified on the grounds of its potential contribution to curing cancer—a hope that has yet to be realized. Biological research is hardly unique in this aspect, as scientists have become quite proficient in writing grant applications that stress the potential useful outcomes of their abstract inquiries.
Financial support, however important it is to the maintenance of scientific inquiry, is only part of the picture. The willingness of government agencies to grant money for scientific research and of citizens to have their taxes used in this manner is indicative of a widespread belief in the legitimacy of scientific research. This legitimacy is in large measure the product of the presumed ability of science to ultimately produce practical results. These ascribed powers of science have been analyzed by Langdon Winner:
[The ultimate success of science] must be accounted to its fulfillment of Baconian ambitions—the delivery of power. Other modes of knowing have been able to give an intelligible, systematic, aesthetically pleasing picture of reality. If science had only been able to accomplish this and nothing more, it is likely that it would have been supplanted by yet another philosophy of inquiry. But in the West at least, the test is not so much what do you know? or how elegant is your interpretation of worldly phenomena? but rather, what can you actually do? This is the conclusive factor, the reason that, for instance, social science has never fully established its credentials in the halls of science.
Science succeeds over rival ways of knowing—poetry, religion, art, philosophy, and the occult—not by its ability to illuminate, not even by its ability to organize knowledge, but by its ability to produce solid results. . . . In the last analysis, the popular proof of science is technology.
This expected ability of science to “deliver the goods” is somewhat paradoxical, for science as a system unto itself responds rather poorly to economic needs. This has even been made into a virtue by many scientists who pride themselves on their insulation from the crass demands of the marketplace. As we have seen, the autonomy of scientists has been legitimized by the conception of science as a detached exercise in free inquiry. But it is also the case that the unpredictable nature of scientific discovery often precludes the possibility of useful discoveries being produced to order.
Scientific research, especially when directed at the discovery of basic principles, is an uncertain endeavor that cannot be guided by schedules and routinized procedures. This is illustrated by the response of one researcher who was offered more research funds by an officer of his company in the hope that the conclusion of a particular project could thereby be hastened. The researcher replied that it would be just as logical to expect that eggs could be made to hatch in half the normal time if twice as many hens were recruited to sit on them. Not only are the paths of scientific discovery full of twists and turns, but many of them terminate in dead ends. Of course, technology may also be incapable of solving the problems presented to it. If it were otherwise, we would have a cure for cancer by now. But most technology is directed toward the solution of specific problems, which narrows its scope and makes it a more predictable enterprise than science.
Scientific knowledge often ends up being extremely useful to technology, but in most instances that is not why it was produced. Scientists typically create knowledge for other scientists. Their efforts are focused on the testing of theories and the solution of problems that have been generated by previous scientific inquiries. If scientific knowledge is used for technological applications, it is because engineers and other technologists have appropriated it for their own use. In most places where science and technology meet, engineers and technicians “pull” knowledge out of science. Only in rare instances is knowledge directly relevant to technological application “pushed” by science itself.
When knowledge is “pushed” from science into technology, it often happens indirectly. The transfer of knowledge from science to technology can be a subtle process, with scientific research motivating technological change by pointing out unseen problems and at the same time suggesting new opportunities. This happened in the 1930s when the evolving science of aerodynamics showed how the behavior of aircraft changed dramatically at high speeds. This research clearly indicated that conventional propeller-driven airplanes would encounter an insurmountable velocity barrier as they approached the speed of sound. At the same time, aerodynamic research indicated that proper streamlining could greatly increase the speed at which airplanes could fly, provided they had a different method of propulsion. In making these discoveries, aerodynamic researchers generated a powerful impetus for the development of jet engines that produced more power and did not have the inherent limitations of existing power systems.

Up to now, this chapter has stressed the differences between science and technology. At this point some mention should be made of the characteristics that they have in common. Both are based on the gathering of knowledge, and they both advance through the cumulative development of that knowledge. Isaac Newton is reputed to have said that he could see farther because he stood on the shoulders of giants. That is, his scientific discoveries were based on knowledge produced by earlier scientists. The same holds true for modern technology. Just as the scientific achievements of an individual chemist owe a great deal to the past research efforts of other chemists, the work of an aerospace engineer draws upon the accomplishments of other aerospace engineers.
More generally, science and technology have been nourished by a supportive culture at least since the days of the early Industrial Revolution. Although science provided few direct inputs into early industrialization, the values and attitudes of engineers and mechanics had much in common with those of scientists. As Peter Mathias has described this era: 
Together, both science and technology give evidence of a society increasingly curious, questioning, on the move, on the make, having a go; increasingly seeking to experiment, wanting to improve. So, much of the significance [of the cultural climate] impinges at a more diffused level, affecting motivations, values, general assumptions, the mode of approach to problem-solving, and the intellectual milieu rather than a direct transfer of knowledge.
A key component of the shared culture of modern science and modern technology is their reliance on the rational thought processes described in Chapter 1. Although the development of both science and technology requires intuitive and other nonrational modes of thought, rationality is essential to the general methodology of science and technology. In general, a rational approach includes a propensity to challenge traditional intellectual authorities; a willingness to settle questions through observation, testing, and experimentation; and a desire to develop exact methods of measurement.Some of the basic elements of this mode of inquiry are described by Robert Pirsig in Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, where he explains how even a clearly technological task like determining why a motorcycle won’t start is addressed through the use of procedures that have much in common with scientific inquiry.30As a first step, a mechanic might formulate the hypothesis that the battery is dead; he or she will then try to honk the horn to see if the battery is working. If the horn honks, the mechanic concludes that the problem doesn’t lie with the battery and proceeds to other parts of the electrical system. Should tests performed on these components show them to be in good shape, the mechanic may hypothesize that the problem lies with the fuel system and conduct tests (experiments) to check them out. And so it goes, with the formulation of a series of hypotheses and the conducting of experiments to test them. In the end the problem is isolated and perhaps fixed; if nothing else, you know what is wrong as you push your motorcycle along the side of the road.
Of course, one shouldn’t take this analysis too far. Although both science and technology make heavy use of rational modes of thought, neither can be properly characterized as the embodiment of rationality. Scientific theories must be logically consistent and rationally articulated, but their ultimate source is human creativity and imagination—qualities often at a considerable distance from rational thought processes. At the other end of the scientific enterprise, the testing of these theories, there are no perfectly rational means of determining the criteria through which theories can be validated or disproved. Even empirically derived “facts” can be subject to interpretation, and general world views can strongly affect what is acceptable as “proof.”31 In similar fashion, a great deal of technological advance is also the product of nonrational thought. And, as was noted earlier, the benefit or harm of a particular technology cannot always be adjudged according to criteria based on rationally determined principles; a great deal hinges on values and ethical standards that are derived through other means.
Other commonalities between science and technology can be noted. Mathematics is important to both as a kind of language and as an analytical tool. The practice of both science and technology requires university-based training that can stretch out for many years. Also, engineers and other technological practitioners employ organized knowledge that is presented and diffused through journals, books, blogs, and professional meetings that have many similarities to those found in the realm of science. And although engineers usually work for firms that try to retain exclusive use of innovative products and processes that were developed in-house, there can be a surprising willingness on the part of engineers to share their knowledge with engineers employed elsewhere.32
Although the sharing of information has long been a characteristic of science, in recent years an increasing number of scientific discoveries have come to be treated as proprietary information. This tendency has been particularly evident in biotechnology, where basic research is often essential for the rapid development of biological and medical technologies. Under these circumstances, the usual distinction between basic science and technological application no longer has much meaning.33 In this field, and in a growing number of others, the distinction between science and technology has become so blurred that both can be subsumed under a single rubric, “technoscience.” Since innovative, biologically based technologies can generate very large profits for the firms that develop them, these firms are likely to be reluctant to share their discoveries with the scientific community as a whole. It is not just for-profit private firms that have a reason for keeping scientific knowledge under wraps; universities are major players in industries based on cutting-edge technologies. Consequently, the research conducted in their laboratories may eventually generate substantial revenues. For universities and private firms alike, the lucrative coupling of basic research with technological application may seriously inhibit the sharing of new information, substances, and devices. These restrictions violate a basic canon of scientific culture—the free distribution of ideas and research findings—and, in the long run, they may result in a slower rate of progress for both science and technology.
Finally, at the core of the common culture of science and technology is a sense of optimism and progress within their own realms. Science and technology are dynamic enterprises that build on past successes, but they also make profitable use of their failures. An inadequate scientific theory may lead to the formulation of a better one, and a collapsed bridge is likely to provide valuable lessons that help to prevent future failures.34 Above all, science is predicated on the belief that the world is knowable, while technology is animated by a conviction that it will always be possible to do something better. Both of these beliefs contribute to the dynamic, essentially optimistic spirits of science and technology.
Although there are broad similarities between science and technology today, their coexistence is problematic, much as it has been in the past. For Melvin Kranzberg, their coexistence has been marked by the same kind of tensions and attractions that characterize the marriage of a man and a woman. In Kranzberg’s words:
History suggests that science and technology, though wedded today, went through a long, indifferent courtship. They grew up independently, either oblivious to each other’s existence or taking scornful note of the other’s presence. When they reached the age of puberty—the scientific revolution in the case of science and the Industrial Revolution in the case of technology—a mild flirtation ensued.
The marriage, when it came at last, was a marriage of convenience and necessity, certainly no love match. Insofar as military needs helped to bring about many a daring and secretive meeting, the ceremonies when finally reached, could be called a shotgun wedding; and the couple, predictably, has not lived happily ever after.
Each partner has retained a good deal of independence, though lately both have been having identity problems. There are constant bickerings about who is contributing more to the marriage. They quarrel over mutual responsibilities, the education of their offspring, and, as might be expected, the household budget.
It is a very modern marriage. Science and technology live independently, yet coordinately, as if they had but one joint bank account and one car. Divorce is frequently discussed. It is invariably rejected, however, because the scandal would surely deface the public image of the parties, and because, I suspect, of the indisputable pleasures and the learned frivolities of the bed.

Today, many technologies make heavy use of the products of scientific inquiry. Much of this use, however, is indirect. A great deal of scientific information finds its way into technological practice through the education of engineers.36 The findings of basic scientific research eventually appear in handbooks, university courses, and textbooks. Much of the scientific knowledge presented in these ways is eventually drawn on during the course of technological development.
Even here there can be problems. It has been argued that a significant amount of engineering education has been distorted by overreliance on science-based instruction. This has led to a devaluation of nonverbal thought, an excessive stress on mathematics, and an unwillingness to tackle problems that do not have a single unique solution. Scientific thinking converges toward a single (if temporary) set of theories, while the history of technology is replete with examples of the old saying that there’s more than one way to skin a cat. An excessive focus on the principles and methods of science may therefore restrict creativity and lead to an overly rigid approach to the solving of technological problems.
There is no getting around the fact that despite all that they have in common, science and technology usually operate in different worlds. If the two are to share in a productive symbiosis, they must be sustained by continual efforts to span the differences that separate them. In many cases, technological development has been stimulated by the presence of individuals and organizations that simultaneously participate in scientific and technological communities. Their primary role is to serve as translators, “decoding information generated in one system and transforming it into information usable in another.”
This process can be seen in the events that culminated in the invention of the vacuum tube, which in the pre-transistor era was an essential part of radio and television technology. The story began with Edison’s invention of the light bulb.40While trying to determine why dark deposits were forming on the interior walls of the bulbs, Edison found that the needle of a galvanometer deflected when a wire probe was placed in a circuit between the galvanometer and the bulb’s glowing filament. Edison did not understand what was producing the flow of electrical current through thin air, although he patented the modified bulb for use as a voltage indicator. (Many years later, the realization came that the current was produced by the migration of electrons from the negatively charged filament to the positively charged probe.)
Nothing practical came of Edison’s discovery until John Ambrose Fleming renewed his acquaintance with these specially equipped bulbs. During the 1880s and 1890s Fleming had conducted a number of experiments using these bulbs; his sporadic efforts produced useful scientific knowledge, but no technological applications. Things began to change in 1899 when he became technical advisor to Guglielmo Marconi’s Wireless Telegraphy Company. At that time, the chief need of the infant radio industry was for a detector that could efficiently convert the weak oscillatory current of radio waves into direct current. After a few years’ work with other devices, in 1904 Fleming came to the sudden realization that the specially equipped light bulbs with which he had previously worked might be used for this purpose. His hunch proved to be correct, and the “oscillation valve,” as he named the device, began to be commercially used for the detection of radio signals a short time later.
Fleming had not been the only one to experiment with modified light bulbs, but he had been uniquely situated to act as a “translator” between science and technology. He was not an inventor like Edison or a full-fledged scientist like other experimenters. Rather, he was a scientifically trained engineer and teacher who was closely associated with the electrical industry and with engineering-training institutions. These separate but interrelated roles gave him the knowledge and the motivation to convert a scientific curiosity into a practical technology.This chapter began with the assertion that technology is not applied science and went on to provide some evidence for this statement. It is undeniable that technology today makes extensive use of scientific knowledge. But as we have seen, scientific knowledge often makes its way into technological practice in a very roundabout way. At the same time, a considerable amount of scientific advance stems from prior achievements in technology. Science and technology have evolved along separate paths that often intersect. At these points of intersection each has often contributed to the other’s development. Both science and technology seem to do best when they remain in close contact, but this should not obscure the fact that in most instances they remain very different enterprises.