A technology is of no use unless it is put to use. This is a crushingly obvious statement, but it does serve to remind us that a technology that never makes it out of a laboratory or an inventor’s basement might just as well not exist. The last two chapters have examined some of the ways in which technologies have come into being; the task of this chapter is to describe how they are adopted by the individuals and organizations that actually put them to use. Our concern here is the diffusion of technologies—that is, the processes through which they spread from their initial sources into homes, factories, offices, and so forth. To begin, we will consider the diffusion of technologies from one country to another. In the second part the focus will narrow as we look into the process of technological diffusion at the level of the individual business firm.

The International Diffusion of Technology
There is an understandable human tendency to believe that progress, technological or otherwise, is largely the result of efforts of one’s own people. We exalt native scientists, entrepreneurs, and inventors, and see in their efforts the major source of our technological advance.The Soviet Union in the Stalin era carried this to ridiculous lengths when Soviet historians claimed that their countrymen had invented everything from the steam engine to baseball, but many other countries have exhibited strains of technological nativism.The truth of the matter is quite different. Although indigenous skills and achievements are an indispensable part of technological advance, few technologically dynamic countries have been isolated from the influences of other lands. Continued technological advance requires an infusion of ideas, tools, and materials from other places, coupled with an ability to make good use of them.
Consider the world in the year 1500. There can be little doubt about what country had produced the most technological innovations up to that time. It was not England, nor was it France, Italy, or Germany. The country with the greatest heritage of inventive achievements was China. By 1500, Chinese technologists had produced not only the compass, paper, and gunpowder—the familiar textbook examples of Chinese inventive ability—but also had been responsible for such inventions as the segmental arch bridge, the chain drive transmission, the spinning wheel, watertight bulkheads for ships, printing, fishing reels, paddlewheel boats, the differential gear, earthquake detection devices, and of course the fine porcelain that takes its name from its country of origin. Europe too could claim some significant technological advances, most notably in mining and cathedral building, but on the whole, there could be little question where the greater degree of inventiveness had been residing.
Yet within less than two centuries China’s lead had dissipated, and the European continent exhibited the greater degree of economic and technological vitality. Much of this dynamism could be attributed to the successful adoption of Chinese inventions by European countries. Paper was an essential complement to printing; together they made possible the rapid circulation of new ideas and stimulated the growth of literacy, which in turn directly contributed to major historical changes such as the Protestant Reformation and the spread of capitalism. The magnetic compass greatly aided transoceanic navigation and allowed the spread of European economic power throughout the world. And gunpowder helped to conquer and secure that world for the benefit of Europe.
The successful use of foreign technologies in early modern Europe was very much in accordance with long-standing historical patterns. Many of the most significant inventions used by the Western world up to that time did not originate there. The stirrup, which initiated major changes in medieval warfare and in so doing reshaped the social system, was not a Western invention, but diffused from Persia sometime after the eighth century, although it too probably originated in China. Horses could not be used effectively as draft animals until a practical collar diffused from Asia to Europe in the eighth century.
Much of the economic dynamism and prosperity of the Western world therefore can be traced to the willingness of its people to accept and make good use of technologies that originated elsewhere. By contrast, China was far less open to foreign inventions. Secure in the belief that they inhabited the “Middle Kingdom” (the literal translation of Zhong Guo, the name by which the Chinese called their country), the Chinese looked at the outside world with more than a trace of condescension. This attitude was particularly evident when China came into contact with the expansionary nations of Europe. During the late eighteenth century, English merchants and officials scoured the world in search of customers for the products of English factories, but they found no takers in China. The emperor made it very clear to one envoy of King George III that “there is nothing we lack. . . . We have never set much store on strange or ingenious objects, nor do we need any more of your country’s manufactures.”
China’s ruling elite persisted in this attitude. Toward the end of the nineteenth century the scholar Kang Youwei advocated the combination of Western techniques with traditional Chinese culture. Although he won the support of the emperor, the reform movement that was initiated in 1898 was aborted in a few months when the emperor was deposed and replaced by the reactionary dowager empress, Dzu Xi. The early years of the Chinese Republic (1912–1949) saw a considerable infusion of Western ideas and technologies, but these were eclipsed by Chiang Kai-shek’s New Life Movement, which stressed a return to Confucian virtues as the cure for China’s weakness.
Even the emergence of a Communist state in 1949 did not result in a whole-hearted acceptance of foreign ideas and ways of doing things. Although a considerable amount of technology transfer from the Soviet Union took place during the early 1950s, the Chinese were offended by Russian arrogance. The political rift between the two countries closed off China’s main source of advanced technology, while at the same time, Maoist ideology contributed to an increasing aloofness to the outside world and stressed self-reliance in technological matters. Only in recent decades has China exhibited an openness to the outside world. In the words of one Chinese journalist, “No nation has a monopoly on culture. Cultural exchanges between nations are inevitable and irresistible. . . . Whatever will facilitate China’s material modernization and its cultural advancement is welcomed.”
In contrast, people and business firms in the United States have a long history of borrowing technologies that originated elsewhere. One could practically date the start of America’s industrial revolution to the year 1790, when Samuel Slater, who had recently emigrated from England, used his accumulated knowhow to construct the first successful mechanized spinning factory in the United States. In the years immediately following, the United States was so deficient in indigenous technological capability that many implements and techniques had to be imported. American canal builders found it necessary to secure from England drawings and examples of devices as simple as a wheelbarrow in order to successfully construct early canals.
These were not simply instances of a young and economically immature nation relying on imported technologies due to temporary incapability. Modern, quintessentially “American” innovations such as automobiles, radios, jet airplanes, compact discs, and the World Wide Web all owe their existence to pioneering efforts that were undertaken in other lands. And along with imported implements, materials, and processes, American technological development has been spurred on by an even more valuable import: people. Although a large reservoir of “Yankee ingenuity” cannot be denied, many of America’s greatest technological achievements were produced by immigrants. It would take many pages simply to list some of the most prominent of these, but a small sample can illustrate the debt that American technology owes to immigrant scientists, inventors, and engineers. One of the first plastics, Bakelite, was the work of a man born and educated in Belgium, Leo Baekeland. The mathematical and engineering work of Charles Steinmetz, a transplanted German, was essential to the development of the American electrical industry. The science of aerodynamics owes much of its early development to an immigrant from Hungary (via Germany), Theodore von Karman. The television camera was invented by a Russian exile, Vladimir Zworykin. This pattern continues today. According to one study, between 1995 and 2005 more than a quarter of new engineering and technology firms had foreign-born founders, CEOs, or chief technology officers, as exemplified by Sergey Brin of Google and Pierre Omidyar of eBay. Equally important, inventors and entrepreneurs, both immigrant and home-grown, have benefited from the services provided by legions of unsung men and women who brought their skills from other lands and in so doing helped to push American technology to new heights.
A heavy reliance on foreign technologies also can be seen in the development of another technological colossus, Japan. The aggressive industrialization effort launched after the Meiji Restoration in 1868 was at first based on the importation of foreign equipment such as locomotives and textile equipment. Foreign technical advice was also avidly sought; during the early years of the new emperor’s reign, the salaries of foreign technicians absorbed 6 percent of the central government’s budget, and 40 to 50 percent of the budget of the Ministry of Industry for the duration of its existence.
As Japan’s industrial enterprises began to emerge, their products were often outright copies of foreign products. At times, Japanese attempts to copy foreign artifacts produced comic results, as exemplified by the factory with a sawtooth roof that faced the wrong way so no light shone through the windows, or the tailor who stitched together a Western-style suit complete with a patch on the pants. But with mounting experience, Japanese workers and managers were able to effect substantial improvements until some of their products were the equal of Western manufactured goods. An early example of this was the Toyoda automatic loom, which in 1929 was exported to a textile mill in England, the birthplace of the Industrial Revolution. Certainly no one laughs at Japanese technology today, although the accusation is occasionally still made that the country excels in the refinement of existing technologies but produces few completely new ones.
Today, a considerable amount of technology transfer occurs when firms in the economically advanced nations of the world establish factories in developing countries, some of them engaged in the manufacture of highly sophisticated electronic equipment such as computers and smartphones. For critics, the appeal of these offshore enterprises centers on the availability of cheap labor; their output consists of assembled products that require few skills on the part of the assemblers. As a result, these enterprises are little more than enclaves of modernity with few if any connections to the host country’s economy and society. In contrast, a more optimistic assessment of these enterprises stresses their positive role in stimulating the development of workers’ skills and technological advance. Governments that are committed to economic and technological advance know that labor gets more expensive as a country develops and workers demand their share of a rising national income. Under these circumstances, low-cost labor ceases to be a nation’s main advantage. Consequently, countries like Taiwan, Korea, and China (as well as Japan in an earlier era) have made concerted efforts to upgrade the skills of their labor forces, so the quality of their labor forces makes up for the higher wages paid to workers. No less important, these countries—China especially—have used multinational firms as sources of up-to-date technologies by requiring the transfer of these technologies as preconditions for allowing these firms to set up shop on their soil. And although it is hardly a commendable business practice, many firms, especially Chinese ones, have gained a fair amount of technological knowhow through outright piracy.

Clever Copyists
In calling attention to piracy and to less flagrant forms of technological borrowing, there is no intention to attribute the achievements of the United States, Japan, and today’s China to technological plagiarism. It is not an easy matter to copy a technology that was produced somewhere else. Having an example of a machine or a material in front of you helps, but it hardly guarantees success. Life would be simpler and easier if technological advance were simply a matter of importing a prototype and then engaging in “reverse engineering.” It does work occasionally, but all too often the process ends in frustration, as when the Chinese government reportedly spent $300 million in the 1980s in a failed attempt to produce a workable copy of the Boeing 707 jetliner.
The very nature of technology makes copying a difficult enterprise. As was stressed in earlier chapters, technologies have to be considered as systems, and if one element is missing or deficient, even seemingly simple tasks such as copying a particular item may be impossible. A successful technology transfer requires numerous complementary inputs, many of which have to be developed and produced by the recipient. There are occasional possibilities for “leapfrogging” over whole stages of development through the importation of foreign technologies. For example, in many parts of the world, cell phones have given millions of people access to telephone service by eliminating the need for an expensive wired infrastructure. But this is an exception; more often than not, the successful use of advanced imported technologies depends on the preparation that comes through involvement with well-established technologies.
This brings us to a related point. The effective use of foreign technologies requires a labor force with a broad range of skills. It is essential that native managers, engineers, technicians, and ordinary workers are capable of making the best of opportunities that imported technologies present. To do so often entails significant modifications to an imported technology. Under these circumstances, the application of imported technologies is combined with indigenous innovative efforts to the point where the two are in fact part of a single process.
A successful user of imported technologies must therefore have a reasonably high level of indigenous capability. As noted by Vernon Ruttan, “The ability to screen, borrow and adapt scientific knowledge and technology requires essentially the same capacity as is required to invent new technology.” This is demonstrated by one study that found that the countries most successful in using foreign technologies tended to be the ones with high levels of indigenous research and development. It is also significant that countries with the highest innovation rate make the quickest use of technologies developed elsewhere. A country (or an individual firm) that draws on technologies developed elsewhere is spared the expense of “reinventing the wheel,” but making effective use of imported technologies—even if only direct copying is required—often requires a stock of indigenous skills that cannot always be easily found.

Adaptation and Adoption
In some cases the diffusion process may result in a technology emerging as something fundamentally different. This is exemplified by the aforementioned transfer of gunpowder from China to Europe. The Chinese at first regarded gunpowder as a medicinal substance, and only after hundreds of years of experimentation did they begin to employ it for fireworks and on occasion for military rockets, bombs, and mines. By the end of the thirteenth century the Chinese were using gunpowder to fire projectiles from vase-shaped guns, but development seems to have stopped at this point. A few decades later, Europeans began using gunpowder for weapons of steadily increasing destructive power, thereby transforming the nature of warfare and ultimately society as a whole.
The changes made in the course of the diffusion of gunpowder from China to Europe were monumental, for the nature of the technology changed along with the purposes to which it was put. In most cases, however, the modifications are far less dramatic. A process of “fine tuning” takes place as the technology is transferred from one place to another. As has been noted above, many successfully diffused technologies succeed only because of alterations and improvements made during the process of diffusion. Some of these changes may be done in order to adapt an imported technology to local conditions. In the late nineteenth century, Japanese entrepreneurs set up textile factories that used ring-spinning machines that had been invented in Europe. Unlike in Europe, however, these machines were supplied with a combination of high-quality long-staple cotton and cheaper short-staple cotton. The thread that was produced was lower in quality, but it was less expensive, an important consideration in a nation that was still poorer than most European countries. Another adaptive change occurred when the railroad, an English invention, crossed the Atlantic. Railroad systems were built in the United States with great haste because there were huge expanses of frontier to be opened up as quickly as possible. One consequence of these conditions was that curves were much sharper than in England. This in turn necessitated changes in locomotive design, as American engines were equipped with pilot wheels placed ahead of the driving wheels to guide them through the curves.

Learning to Make Steel in Old Japan
The early development of the Japanese steel industry provides another illustration of a successfully diffused technology that required many adaptations wrought by native workers and technicians. Although the Japanese had been making small batches of high-quality steel for centuries, their indigenous industry was incapable of making iron and steel in large quantities. Japanese steelworkers therefore looked to Europe for better ways of producing steel. The first Japanese attempts to draw on foreign techniques occurred in the 1850s when they attempted to produce cannons by using methods described in a Dutch book on steel production. Success was slow in coming. Numerous trials resulted in the production of cannon that burst the first time they were fired. Yet underlying these failures was a highly useful learning process. At first, the native iron workers were incapable of melting even half of the required pig iron, but by the fifth attempt a complete cannon was cast, albeit not with complete success. Still, even this limited achievement required strenuous efforts to learn how to treat the raw material and to develop devices and techniques to bore the barrel of the cannon. Within about 20 years of the original attempt, the foundry had successfully cast approximately 200 cannons. In accomplishing this, the cannon founders had been able to draw on indigenous capabilities in such things as the production of fire bricks for use in the reverberatory furnace in which pig iron was melted, the construction of water-powered boring machines, and the employment of high temperature furnaces for melting the iron.
Although their efforts represented an attempt at imitating foreign products and techniques, more was involved than mere copying. What began as an effort to imitate foreign techniques ended successfully only when indigenous capabilities were applied to the solution of production and design problems. The process continued in 1880 when foreign engineers were recruited to oversee an ambitious effort to increase steel production. Initially this too was a failure, largely because the foreign experts did not take into account the special characteristics of Japanese coal and iron ore. But even this failed attempt to produce steel through the importation of foreign materials and experts ultimately met with success 12 years later when a Japanese engineer and one of his students reopened the dormant blast furnace after solving the problems created by the use of native coke and iron ore.
The point of this brief narrative is simply that Japan’s successful nineteenth- centuryattempt to create a modern iron and steel industry was the result of importing foreign equipment, techniques, and expertise while at the same time making full use of the native capabilities that were required for their successful employment. This example shows that technological diffusion is not a one-way process; without active participation by the recipients of the foreign technology, an imported technology may end up an expensive failure. In turn, effective participation often is the product of previous efforts at indigenous technological transformation. The issue is not one of “imitation” versus “self-reliance,” but of how to achieve an effective blending of the two.

Appropriate Technology 
Up to this point there has been an unspoken assumption that the use of technologies developed in advanced nations is essential to the technological and economic modernization of developing countries. Modifications may have to be made to these technologies, but, on the whole, technologies of foreign origin are a sound basis for indigenous development. This assumption can be challenged by noting that the countries receiving foreign technologies today are not like nineteenth-century Japan and the United States. Most are far poorer, not just in terms of wealth, but also in regard to human skills; this creates numerous problems in effectively usingthe sophisticated technologies that have been created for the developed nations of the world. Moreover, poor countries have large and growing populations, making the creation of jobs one of their prime needs. Although in recent years the rate of population growth has slowed in many poor countries, there still remains a huge cohort of new entrants to the labor force. As a result, youth unemployment rates are still stubbornly high; according to a recent estimate by the International Labor Organization, 88 million young people around the world are struggling to find a job.
Unfortunately, many of the technologies that have been developed in the economically advanced nations have been designed to save labor, not to maximize its use. Labor is often saved by using technologies that allow the substitution of capital for labor, yet one of the distinguishing features of poor nations is that they are critically short of capital. And finally, is it reasonable to expect that the world as a whole can sustain the global diffusion of the technologies that have been developed by the rich nations of the world? It is hard to imagine China or India consuming resources at the rate the United States does. To take one notable example, China at the end of 2010 had an approximate ratio of one car per 17.2 persons, about one-tenth the ratio in the developed countries. If China, a nation of 1.4 billion people, were to achieve a car-to-population ratio equal to North America, Europe, and Japan, the prospects for resource depletion and environmental pollution would be grim indeed.
Due to the drastically different circumstances of today’s underdeveloped countries, technologies that have worked well in the rich nations where they originated may fail when they are taken to a different setting. Even worse, they may seriously distort the course of a nation’s development and leave it poorer than when it started out by concentrating human and financial resources in a few privileged segments of the economy and society, leaving much of the population, especially those in rural areas, as poor as ever. To take one particularly notorious example, after Western experts introduced large tractors into Pakistan, farm owners replaced farm laborers with the new machines. In one region, 40 percent of these workers lost their jobs and thus were forced to migrate to the cities and lives of dire poverty. Per-acre crop yields hardly increased at all.
According to critics of conventional technology transfers, what poor countries need is a set of technologies appropriate to the conditions prevailing in these countries. Sometimes they are called “alternative technologies,” sometimes they are called “intermediate technologies” (because they stand in an intermediary position between modern and traditional ways of doing things), and sometimes they are simply called appropriate technologies. These technologies, it is claimed, do more than boost production; they increase employment, help to redress the maldistribution of wealth and income, empower people, contribute to economic independence, and preserve the environment.
Examples of appropriate technologies in developing countries include hand-powered nut shellers, bicycle-powered pumps for irrigation and water distribution, and rolling drums for transporting water. Appropriate technologies less directly connected with production include shelters made out of concrete and canvas, solar-powered lights, and inexpensive laptop computers for schoolchildren. The utility of these technologies seems evident, and few could take issue with the general goals of appropriate technology. The difficulty lies in their actual development and implementation. Consider the first goal: increasing employment. As noted earlier, in poor countries there is good reason to select technologies that use relatively more labor than capital. But using labor-absorbing technologies may not result in overall increases in employment. At first glance, small-size sugar mills in India seem to be excellent examples of appropriate technology. In the late 1970s they produced 20 percent of India’s output—1.3 million tons of sugar per year—while providing jobs for more than half a million people. Many jobs were created because the same amount of capital required to build a large modern sugar mill could be used for the construction of forty mini-mills; together these employed ten times more people than the modern mill.
Unfortunately however, these apparent employment gains were lost elsewhere in the system. Although the mini-mills produced two and a half times more sugar per unit of capital, they incurred much higher labor costs (exactly how high depended on wage rates in the small mills compared to the large ones). This resulted in higher prices, lower profits, government subsidies, or some combination of all three, which in turn prevented funds from entering other sectors of the economy. Were this not the case, there would have been more money to spend on other goods and services, and a consequent stimulation of employment in these industries. Thus, the apparent creation of jobs in small sugar mills in all likelihood produced no net increases in employment.
Many economists would argue that a free market system, with its realistic reckoning of capital and labor costs, will naturally result in the use of labor-intensive appropriate technologies. But the choice of technologies is not always governed by economic calculations. Technologies may be selected because they meet the requirements of powerful segments of the society, as when ultra-modern hospital technologies are installed to serve the urban upper class of a country that lacks basic medical services for most of its people.
At the same time, even practical, profit-oriented businessmen in underdeveloped countries can be charmed by the technological sophistication of foreign technologies that do not make good economic sense. According to one study of business firms in Indonesia, intermediate technologies resulted in lower costs and equal product quality, but they were often rejected in favor of advanced technologies of foreign origin. This was especially likely to happen in firms that had oligopolistic control over their market. Under these circumstances, the aesthetic appeal of sophisticated technologies and the prospect of managing machines instead of people overrode the economic advantages of more appropriate technologies.
Finally, a consideration of alternative technologies that is confined to economic matters is incomplete, for the appropriate technology movement has been motivated by a deep concern with how technologies are connected to larger issues. In the final analysis, a technology can be adjudged appropriate or inappropriate only by reference to particular values, and these cannot be defined exclusively in economic or technological terms. The appropriate technology movement also has directed attention to the role played by powerful groups and institutions in the choice of technologies. Choices are likely to be seriously constrained when donors of foreign aid, international lending agencies, and multinational corporations occupy positions of dominance. It is also likely that the emergence of appropriate technologies is seriously hindered by the international distribution of R&D expenditures, only about 16 percent of which is spent in the underdeveloped countries of the world.
Appropriate technologies, however defined, cannot be a panacea for poverty and backwardness. At the same time, the transfer of sophisticated technologies from developed countries may cause more harm than good. Choices must be made, and in poor countries as well as in rich ones, the selection of technologies reflects many larger issues. One of the most important of these is sustainability. Today’s technologies have enriched our lives in many ways, but can we continue to degrade the natural environment while also expecting the perpetual availability of energy supplies and other resources? In this context, technologies are appropriate when they save energy, require minimal resources, and relieve stresses on the environment. Examples of sustainable technologies include products that lend themselves to recycling, building designs that require little energy for heating and cooling, and road systems that are safe and convenient for cyclists and pedestrians.

Business Firms and Technological Diffusion
Many of the same processes that characterize the diffusion of technology from one country to another also manifest themselves when new technologies are acquired by business firms in the same country. Many factors affect the speed with which new technologies diffuse. According to Christian P. Tanon and Everett M. Rogers, these include relative advantages over existing technology, compatibility with existing values of the firm, the ease or difficulty of understanding and applying the new technology, the ease in experimenting with the new technology or employing it on a trial basis, and the extent to which positive results are apparent. In highlighting the importance of ease of use, observability, and comprehensibility, this list carries the implication that, after all is said and done, it is individual people who determine the success of a technological innovation. The diffusion of technology is still essentially a learning process, through which the recipient gains an understanding of how the technology works while at the same time adapting the technology to the recipient’s particular needs. In this, the activities of skilled people are usually essential. As Mira Wilkins explains, “Often the product, or the description in the patent, or mere drawings and instructions, are inadequate for transfers of technology; [people] are needed to carry, explain, and facilitate the introduction of new processes or products.”
When we speak of “people,” we mean special kinds of people. The effective transfer of technology often requires a movement from one environment to another, such as from a laboratory to a factory. Technology is fundamentally a system of knowledge, but knowledge that is readily comprehensible in one setting may be a great mystery in another. As with the conversion of scientific knowledge to technological practice noted in the previous chapter, successful diffusion sometimes requires the services of a kind of “translator”—a person capable of functioning in both settings so that information can be transferred from one to the other.
As Hugh Aitken’s study of the early days of radio indicates, the efforts of “translators” were crucial to the development of that technology and its adoption by commercial enterprises. There was the early work of Heinrich Hertz, who “translated” James Clerk Maxwell’s theories of electromagnetic radiation into a laboratory technology that allowed an empirical examination of the theory. Following Hertz, Oliver Lodge moved beyond the laboratory experiment through his development of an imperfect but workable method of using radio waves for actual communication. The first stage in the development of radio was essentially completed by Marconi, who took the embryonic technology and converted it into a practical (and highly lucrative) commercial business. Throughout the course of radio’s history, information was put into a new form, pushing the technology to the next stage ofdevelopment. In Aitken’s summary, “At each stage in the process of translation, information generated in one system was converted into a form that ‘made sense’ in terms of another; and at each stage new information was blended with what was already known to create something essentially new.”

A Risky Business
Some technologies, especially those involving military matters, are sponsored by governments, but the majority of technological innovations are adopted by private businesses pursuing their economic goals. Firms may adopt new technologies in order to cut their costs, improve their products, bolster their profits, penetrate new markets, or achieve some combination of any or all of these. The speed and extent of diffusion are therefore strongly influenced by expectations of costs and benefits.
Expectations, however, are not always met. Along with the opportunities presented by a new technology come uncertainties that cannot be assessed through conventional economic analysis. No new technology is a “sure thing.” Some end up embarrassing failures, and even with a technology that is ultimately successful, its immediate advantages may be slight and its benefits may be a long time in coming. On a more positive note, some new technologies may exceed expectations when they are complemented by other technologies. Under these circumstances, new products and processes are more than the sum of their parts, as when a combination of the laser and the computer gave birth to supermarket scanners, printers, and robotic surgery.
It is often the case that the potential of an emerging technology is what matters, and this may be the hardest thing of all to assess. Many years may elapse before a technology passes from laboratory feasibility to commercial value, that is, from invention to innovation. Although some inventions made the transition rapidly—only one year in the case of Freon refrigerants—others have taken much more time. In the case of the mechanical cotton picker it was 53 years, and for the zipper,27 years. The fluorescent lamp took no less than 79 years to make the passage from laboratory demonstration to commercial viability.
The decision to adopt a technology represents a firm’s assessment of the likely benefits accruing from the use of the new technology, weighed against the uncertainties that attend its use and the speed at which these uncertainties can be dissipated. Given the nature of technological innovation, uncertainties will rarely vanish completely, but as information is gathered and experience gained, uncertainties can be converted into risks. More than terminology is involved here; according to a distinction made by economists and game theorists, “uncertainty” indicates an inability to predict an outcome, whereas “risk” implies at least a rough notion of the probability of success or failure. The ability to make calculations of this sort does not ensure accurate predictions of success or failure, but at least it enables managers to make informed judgments of their likelihood.
Not all risks are technological in nature. Although any new way of doing things can be presumed to have its share of bugs and other unanticipated problems, these may be minor when compared to the commercial uncertainties of a new venture. Uncertainties of this sort can be particularly problematic, for decision makers usually find it easier to assess the probability of technical success than the probability of marketing success. “Will it fly?” is easier to determine than “Will anybody pay money to fly in it?” This was the literal problem for the Anglo–French supersonic airliner, the Concorde. A stunning technological achievement that required the solution of countless complex problems, the Concorde was a commercial failure. An extraordinarily expensive aircraft to fly and maintain, it never generated revenues commensurate with the costs of its development and operation. No private business could have survived this sort of failure. Only the financial support of two governments, motivated by considerations of national pride as much as anything else, kept the Concorde aloft until it was retired in 2004.

The NIH Syndrome
The inherently uncertain or at best risky nature of many technological innovations may explain the presence of one persistent block to the diffusion of new technologies, the Not Invented Here syndrome, or NIH for short. People and organizations exhibiting this syndrome are reluctant to make use of technologies that were invented elsewhere. The corrosive effects of the NIH mentality were bemoaned by Henry Ford II:“There’s too much NIH—not invented here [in the automobile industry]. . . . Lots of times a guy brings something in, and unless the improvement is rather dramatic, nothing happens. The status quo is a hell of a lot easier than making changes.”
Internal resistance to technological innovation, while frustrating to some, is certainly understandable. As was noted, innovation is at best a risky process that can generate a great deal of discomfort, and this discomfort will be especially intense when the innovation has not been the work of those who are affected by it. It is also the case that internally generated technologies are likely to be more compatible with established organizational structures and activities. Moreover, an internally generated technology will probably have a “champion” within the organization who seeks its utilization, and management may be more inclined to pay attention to the ideas of their organization’s own personnel.
These are explanations for the presence of the NIH syndrome, but not excuses. A dynamic firm can ill-afford to ignore useful new technologies just because they were developed elsewhere. We have already seen that a receptivity to “foreign” technologies has been crucial to the development of Europe, the United States, and Japan, and that a resistance to them was a major reason for the economic retardation of imperial China. An individual firm that chooses to resist or ignore new technologies because of their source may ultimately find that security and pride have been purchased at a very great price. Its comfortable routines and organizational structures are retained, right up to the day that it goes out of business.

Efforts to Restrict the Diffusion of Technology
The exclusive possession of a particular technology can confer great advantages on those who have it. Individual firms or whole countries may therefore go to great lengths to block the diffusion of these technologies. During the sixteenth century the glassmakers of Venice sought to prevent others from learning the secrets that went into the production of Venetian glass, and they even sent assassins to poison Venetian expatriates who had set up glassworks abroad. England enacted a law in 1719 that forbade the emigration of skilled artisans, such as the aforementioned Samuel Slater, whose knowledge of British equipment and practices was a crucial element in the early development of the American textile industry. The export of machinery also was forbidden from the 1780s until the middle of the nineteenth century. 
Today, technologically advanced nations attempt to prevent the export of advanced technologies through export licensing requirements. Licenses may be denied if national security could be compromised by the transfer of a particular technology. The transmission of knowledge alone can also be deemed a threat. In 2012 the potential danger of scientific information falling into the wrong hands led to requests by the U.S. federal government to request two groups of researchers to temporarily withhold the publication of some research results involving the genetic manipulation of the virus responsible for bird flu. Although the research was conducted in order to aid in the prevention of future epidemics, it was feared that the data it generated could become the basis of a future bioterrorist attack.
Past efforts to suppress the outflow of technology and the knowledge upon which it rests have rarely been successful, and there is little likelihood that contemporary efforts will fare any better. The transfer of plans, equipment, data, and products are extremely difficult to stop, even with rigorous attempts at policing. Also, as exemplified by the case of Samuel Slater, the movement of people has historically been the main vehicle for the transfer of technologies. This sort of movement is very hard to stop, especially in a free society.
Attempts to stem the outward flow of technology may even be counterproductive. A country that attempts to bar the export of technology may end up damaging itself more than anyone else. Technological development often requires the interchange of information from numerous sources. The attempt to seal off a technology will restrict the flow of information from both domestic and foreign sources, and thereby result in a slower pace of technological advance.
Finally, it is often the case that the most important “secret” is that a technology exists. During the late 1940s and early 1950s, there was a great deal of anguish in the United States after the Soviet Union exploded its first nuclear bomb. The general belief was that the Soviets had obtained our “atomic secrets,” and two Americans were executed for their role in passing on these “secrets.” But the Soviets had long known the most important thing: that a massive explosion could be produced through the fissioning of atomic nuclei. Once this fact was known, it was only a matter of time before the Soviets learned how to do it themselves, with or without the clandestine transfer of American technology. Knowing that a problem can be solved is often the most important step in its solution.

Patents and the Diffusion of Technology
An individual or a business firm naturally wants technological diffusion to take place on its own terms. If it has developed a novel technology, it wants the benefits of that technology to accrue only to itself, and not to others who might be able to copy an invention that has required a great deal of effort and expense. This is a legitimate desire, and it has been recognized as such by the establishment of the patent system. The possession of a patent confers exclusive use of an invention; it is a legal monopoly. Without the prospect of such a monopoly, it is believed, there would be a diminished motivation to invent, and in the long run society as a whole would suffer from a slower rate of technological advance.
Although it is aimed at restricting the sale or use of a particular technology to a single individual or firm, there are some ways in which the patent system may stimulate technological diffusion. The filing of a successful patent application makes the invention public, for the basic design and specifications are open to inspection by anyone willing to pay a small fee. In fact, the word “patent” is derived from the Latin verb pateo, which means “to open.” One of the chief justifications for awarding a patent is that the inventor has not attempted to keep his or her invention secret, but rather has revealed its workings to the public. As the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in 1933, an inventor “may keep his invention secret and reap its fruits indefinitely. In consideration of its disclosure and the consequent benefit to the community, the patent is granted.”
Although direct copying is of course forbidden, access to the public record may give a clearer sense of how a technological problem may be addressed and may stimulate alternative approaches to its solution. Then, too, patent holders often pass their inventions to other firms in return for a licensing fee. This arrangement may allow for the more rapid diffusion of a technology because the licensing agreement often facilitates the transfer of supplementary material necessary for the best use of the device or process. In some cases, a licensing arrangement may result in a better product, as happened when DuPont developed waterproof cellophane after being licensed to produce the original version.
At the same time, however, patent protection may inhibit technological advance. A well-entrenched firm may hold a patent in order to suppress an invention that could seriously shake up existing routines or even threaten the firm’s existence. It seems as though everybody has a brother-in-law who knows a man who invented a way to make his car run on water straight from the garden hose, but “of course the big oil companies bought up all the patents.” One shouldn’t put much credence in these stories, but it is true that dominant companies have at times used their control of patents to restrict innovation, as happened with the design of light bulbs when General Electric held the key patents.
The use of patents to directly suppress certain technologies poses less of a threat to innovation than the widespread use of patenting as a strategic and tactical weapon. Patents are supposed to motivate individuals and business firms to create innovative products and processes, but according to critics, their primary purpose is to allow patentees to harass competitors, collect undeserved royalties, bolster the value of financial portfolios, and block innovations that pose potential threats to a firm’s market position. Critics of the present patent system have also called attention to the monopoly power that has been conferred by a recent upsurge in the patenting of entities that in the past were not entitled to patent protection, most notably computer software, genes, and business methods.
Although it may confer considerable power in the marketplace, the holding of a patent does not necessarily confer an overwhelming competitive advantage, since there may be considerable scope for “inventing around” the patent. Moreover, there are no industries where a key technology is covered by a single “master patent” that can be used to repulse potential competitors. There have been attempts to dominate an emerging industry through the wielding of a patent, most notably when, in 1895, George B. Selden was granted a patent for the automobile. Selden and the subsequent holders of the patent were able to extract licensing fees from most automobile manufacturers. One manufacturer who refused to go along was Henry Ford, who successfully challenged the validity of the patent in court and won a great deal of public acclaim as a result.
It also has to be recognized that a patent never confers ironclad protection for inventors; it may be little more than a “license to sue.” In recent years, most patent holders have successfully waged court battles against individuals and firms who have been accused of infringing upon their patents, but both sides may incur sizeable costs in terms of time, talent, and money. As a result, many individuals and firms have been content to exploit their unpatented invention until the copiers are able to seize a large share of the market. In other cases, patented products and processes are quickly outmoded by the advance of technology, and a temporary monopoly position is soon lost. On the other side of the coin, parties who have been charged with patent infringement may feel that they are in the right, but they will nonetheless elect to pay royalties to the patentee in order to avoid an expensive and drawn-out courtroom battle.
Whether the patent system serves as an overall stimulus or hindrance to technological advance is a matter of considerable debate, and one not likely ever to be settled. Like many social institutions, it owes its existence to inertia and the efforts of parties with a direct interest in maintaining it. Under these circumstances, the status quo usually prevails.