As we saw in the last two chapters, a succession of new technologies has vastly enhanced the ability of people to send and receive messages. Today, we are experiencing the latest phase of this ongoing revolution as the Internet, mobile phones, and social media are reshaping the ways in which we communicate with one another. But to repeat what by now should be a familiar theme, these advances have been accompanied by a number of new issues and problems. The same free flow of information that enhances our ability to communicate also gives rise to concerns about the protection of information that we do not want to move so freely, such as intellectual property and personal data, about unequal access to information exacerbating the gap between the haves and have-nots, as in the “digital divide,” and about the difficulty and expense of filtering, managing, and using so much information. This chapter traces the development of digital communication technologies and the challenges they pose, and shows how technological advances can move along unanticipated paths. 

The Birth and Growth of the Internet
The Internet can be described as a giant network of smaller computer networks that allow users to access files located anywhere within these individual networks. These files can be e-mail messages, Web pages, YouTube videos, and social networking updates, to name the most prominent. As with many technologies, the invention of the digital network that eventually evolved into today’s Internet began with the needs of the military. The sponsoring agency for the development of the first computer network was the U.S. Department of Defense’s Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), hence the name of the first computer network, ARPANET. Its initial purpose was to tie together a small number of mainframe computers so that data could be uploaded and downloaded to and from any computer in the network. An important aspect of ARPANET was the division of each block of data into a number of smaller “packets.” In this way, the capacity of the network could be maximized by sending each packet over the route that was least congested at the time. This technique had the additional virtue of ensuring that messages would go through even if some routes were destroyed by an enemy attack, although this was not its primary purpose. The use of ARPANET for computer-to-computer communication began in 1969 when a team at UCLA attempted to transmit data by connecting their computer to one at Stanford University. The first transmission, the command to “LOG IN,” failed when the computer crashed at “G.” The network was intended to be used for the transfer of data, but before long researchers were using it to communicate with researchers at other sites. Not all of these communications were serious; jokes and idle chatter were a significant portion of ARPANET communication. By the early 1970s the sending of digitized messages, which became known as electronic mail or simply e-mail, constituted three-quarters of ARPANET’s traffic, a function that had not been considered when ARPANET was first established. In this sense, the network was a social construction, one that resulted from its users taking it well beyond its intended purpose. This was not a unique occurrence; as we have seen before, technologies created for one purpose can end up being used for something quite different, as when radio mutated from wireless telegraphy into commercial broadcasting.
Computer networking remained largely in the military realm in the 1970s; by the end of the decade, only 16 nodes were on university campuses, while the remaining 46 belonged to members of the defense establishment. But the appeal of networked computing stimulated the development of alternative systems. Responding to growing demand, the National Science Foundation (NSF) provided financial sponsorship for the Computer Science Network (CSNET), which went into operation in 1982, offering networking at a considerably lower cost than the $100,000 annual expense of an ARPANET hookup. The NSF also created a “backbone” in 1985 to link its five supercomputing centers and to connect with CSNET and some elements of ARPANET, which had been supplanted by an exclusively military network in 1983. Computer networks expanded throughout the 1980s, facilitated by the development of programs for the efficient routing of digitized information, notably TCP (Transmission Control Program). It was during this period that the power and utility of the Internet were given a massive boost when programmers began to build systems that allowed users to access other network sites by clicking on the highlighted text or an icon that appeared on the on-screen document. By clicking on these links users could easily move all over the Internet as they accessed related text, image, and sound files. The first of these networks were proprietary, and to be included required the payment of a fee. A different approach was taken by Tim Berners-Lee at the European Organization for Nuclear Research (known by its French acronym, CERN), who was the primary developer of another software system for accessing files within computer networks. Known as hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP), it was released in 1991 and formed the basis of a network that Berners-Lee called the World Wide Web (WWW). Two years later, the WWW team announced that they had made a crucial decision; CERN would not attempt to patent or claim any copyright fees for the technology underlying the Web. This meant that there would be no restrictions on becoming part of the Web, and as a result, it became a virtually universal repository of computer-based information and entertainment. The Web underwent explosive growth in the years that followed. In December 1993 there were 623 websites; by the end of 2011, the Web contained about 555 million sites, with hundreds more being added every day. The growth of the Web was paralleled by the growth of the Internet as a whole. By 2012 about one-third of the world’s population was “netizens.” But as we shall see, worldwide Internet usage is very unevenly distributed, with high rates of usage in some places offset by very low rates in others. The revolutionary changes wrought by the Internet reflect rapid advances in the development of computer hardware and software. But as has been noted earlier, large-scale changes are not just the product of solitary inventions. Rather, they entail the prior existence or creation of complementary elements. This is particularly evident when we consider the use of the Internet for the buying and selling of goods—e-commerce, as it has come to be called. Computers and computer networks have stimulated the emergence of a new kind of shopping by providing access to digital catalogs and allowing customers to place orders by clicking a few onscreen buttons. But the Internet and computers to access it are not enough; online buying also requires credit or debit cards and the security measures employed to protect the customers using them. For sellers, successful e-commerce depends on the use of barcode readers for selecting and keeping track of items, forklifts for retrieving them from high shelves, and conveyor belts to move them to the packing room. The transport of these items to the customers who ordered them is usually performed by nothing more avant-garde than a delivery truck, often in the service of the venerable U.S. Postal Service. In sum, the Internet has brought substantial changes to retailing, but much more has been required than sophisticated computers and software.
As with all significant technological innovations, the Internet has been beset by challenges and conflicts. One major issue is “net neutrality,” the expectation that every Internet site will be accessible, irrespective of which Internet service provider (ISP) is providing the access. Without net neutrality, an ISP could enable access to its chosen sites while restricting access to those of its competitors. This is particularly blatant when it is practiced by countries that attempt to block access to sites that their governments view as threats to their power and authority. It also has emerged as an issue in the United States where private-sector ISPs have been accused of giving preferential treatment to allied TV services over other providers.
Another restriction on complete access to the Internet may be self-imposed. This occurs when users confine most of their Internet usage to what have been called “walled gardens.” Selective Internet access began when providers like America Online offered an easy route to Internet sites. Today, Apple, Facebook, and Google serve as portals to the Internet for many users, while at the same time retaining some degree of control over access. This is particularly evident with Google searches that provide links in accordance with the user’s search history. Although perhaps convenient, this practice may result in someone with a perceived political orientation being initially presented with links to sites that are in accord with this orientation. This is analogous to what has been termed “narrowcasting,” the tailoring of radio and television programming to fit the interests and beliefs of specific audience segments. 

E-Mail and the Network Effect
The use of computer-to-computer communication has spread at warp speed since the first message was sent in 1969; by 2011 there were 3.146 billion e-mail accounts worldwide, and every day three billion messages traveled through cyberspace.The rapid expansion of e-mail communication is a prime example of the “network effect.” This simply means that an interconnected system becomes increasingly valuable as more members are connected to it. A telephone, computer, or any kind of communication device would be of limited use if it were connected to only a few dozen similar devices. But anyone with an e-mail account has the potential to connect with more than three billion other e-mail users, A network also illustrates the power of positive feedback; as a network expands it becomes of greater potential value to people and organizations still outside the network. This motivates them to join the network, which makes the network even more valuable, which induces more people and organizations to join it, and so it goes until a saturation point is eventually reached.
In the case of e-mail, the network effect is complemented by the convenience, rapidity, and accuracy of e-mail messaging. But as with all useful technologies, the consequences of widespread e-mail use are not entirely benign. Regular users are all too aware of the annoyances engendered by e-mail. One of the worst of these is spam, the unwanted appearance of messages sent by sites featuring pornography, bogus lottery results, prescription medicines of dubious origin, and fake Rolex watches. Spam filters can partly eliminate these unwanted messages, although occasionally at the cost of a valid message being blocked. 
Spam is one aspect of what might be termed a “reverse network effect.” Although many e-mail messages are useless, annoying, or both, many other messages have some value, but only of a very minor sort—lame jokes, the minutes of a committee that has scant relevance to one’s own job, pictures of a colleague’s dog wearing a Spiderman costume, and so on. The larger one’s network, the more messages of this sort will show up in the e-mail inbox. As a result, more and more hours are devoted to e-mail, but with little to show for much of it. The torrent of e-mail received by many users has in some cases resulted in what has been called “e-mail bankruptcy,” whereby victims of message overload have shut down their accounts and used a separate site to politely inform past senders that they will receive no response to their messages. In today’s world, the abandonment of e-mail requires an alternative means of communication, and some individuals and organizations have turned to instant messaging, videoconferencing, and social media to meet this need.
For those still connected, e-mail represents a significant degree of engagement with the Internet. But even the hundreds of millions of hours spent on e-mail every month pale in comparison with the monthly tally of 906 million hours (22.7 percent of time spent online) devoted to social networking and 407 million hours (10.2 percent of online time) playing games. These will be taken up in later sections of this chapter, but first we will take a look at one of the main platforms for these activities, smartphones and other mobile communication devices.

Mobile Communications
The growth of the many components of the Internet occurred in conjunction with the widespread acquisition of personal computers that began in the early 1980s. Access expanded significantly in the early years of the twenty-first century with the appearance of the first mobile telephones capable of logging onto the Internet. In the years that followed, the rapidly expanding capabilities of these so-called smartphones have expanded to the point that their ability to send and receive telephone calls seems almost incidental to their other functions. More recently, the introduction of tablet computers such as Apple’s iPad has given their owners a larger screen and new functions. The expanded capabilities of smartphones and tablets have made them the favorite platforms for social networking, game playing, e-mail, and other Internet-based activities. In addition, the portability of these devices allows their users to do a variety of things that would be impossible or impractical with a personal computer, such as GPS navigation and paying for purchases. Their specific features aside, smartphones and tablets have ushered in a new phase of human existence, what has been called “The Age of Connection,” an era in which anyone with a telephone or an Internet account can potentially reach anyone similarly equipped almost instantaneously.
As with the other elements of twenty-first-century information and communication technology, the number of smartphones has grown dramatically: 487.7 million smartphones were sold worldwide in 2011—more than the total sales of PCs and tablets12—and it is likely that this figure will more than double by 2015. The United States has been a receptive market for these devices; by early 2012 nearly 50 percent of mobile phone users over the age of 18 were equipped with smartphones.
Much of the attractiveness of smartphones and tablets lies in the applications (“apps” for short) that have been developed for them, allowing their users to track their investments, receive sports scores, receive turn-by-turn driving instructions, find their cars in a parking lot, and much more. According to one survey, by the fall of 2011, 18 billion apps for the Apple iPhone had been downloaded since the firm first opened its app store in 2008. The development of these apps has become an industry in itself that collectively produces hundreds of thousands of different apps. The value of most of these apps is, however, open to question. Although vast numbers of them are available for downloading, only a few account for the majority of actual downloads. In 2011 a mere 10 apps accounted for 43 percent of the apps actually used on the Android platform, and 50 of them accounted for 61 percent.Many apps are abandoned or rarely used; a quarter of downloaded apps are tried once and then never used again, while 68 percent of owners of smartphones with apps use only five or fewer of them at least once a week.
Although we tend to associate twenty-first-century technologies like mobile phones with the industrially developed countries, these phones have become widespread in the poorer parts of the world. Most of them lack the features of smartphones, but they have facilitated communications while circumventing the need for a wired infrastructure. Mobile phones are used to maintain family ties for migratory workers, to apprise farmers of crop prices, and even to provide basic medical diagnoses. Some mobile phone users in Africa are even able to use their phones as mobile banksthat allow them to electronically store money, transfer funds, and pay bills. Mobile phones, and smartphones especially, have been one of the most transformative technologies of the early twenty-first century. The changes they have wrought are apparent everywhere, but nowhere more so than in the poor, rural areas of the world, where half of the world’s population resides. In the space of a few years, the spread of mobile phones has made it possible to communicate with others instantaneously instead of having to walk long distances in order to do so.

More Digital Connections: Social Networks 
As was noted above, more than 900 million hours each month are spent on social media in the United States. Smartphones are of particular importance for this activity; their users spend more time on social media than those who confine their digital networking to desktop computers. In some ways the dramatic increase in the number of social media sites and their members is merely the continuation of age-old social patterns. People have always sought to connect with one another—it is one of the defining characteristics of our species—but for most of human existence the ability to interact with one another and to create, join, and participate in social networks did not go beyond face-to-face interactions. As we have seen in Chapter 12, written language and printing greatly expanded the boundaries of communication, and during the last two centuries the telegraph, telephone, radio, and television stretched these boundaries even further. 
But what has differed from old patterns is the speed at which digital communications media gained a large audience. According to a United Nations study, it took radio broadcasters 38 years to reach an audience of 50 million, while television took 13 years. For the Internet, only four years were required to assemble 50 millionusers. A similar trajectory can be seen in the growth of social network sites. Facebook, the most commonly used site, began with a few dozen users at Harvard University in 2004. By the end of 2011, it counted 845 million active users and$3.7 billion in revenues. At that time, 57 percent of Facebook’s active users interacted with the service on any given day. The average Facebook user spends seven hours per month on the site.
Other social networking sites also exhibited impressive rates of growth, LinkedIn, a site oriented toward work and careers, reached 150 million members by 2012, nine years after its initial launch. Twitter, despite, or perhaps because, its messages (“tweets”) are limited to no more than 140 characters, has also grown at an impressive rate; founded in 2006, six years later it had 140 million users who collectively accounted for an average of 340 million tweets every day.
The numerical success of these and other social networking sites is impressive. Of much more potential interest, however, is their effects on society and culture in general, and on communication in particular. In contrast to firm statistics on the number of users, an accounting of social media’s influence on society and culture is necessarily speculative. The relative newness of Internet-based social networking means that definitive statements are premature and are subject to later review, but some interesting ideas and findings have emerged. On the one hand, social media and other Internet-related media such as e-mail have moved us closer to Marshall McLuhan’s “Global Village” by connecting people on the basis of interests, work relationships, and political causes rather than geographical proximity. At the same time, however, digitally mediated connections may be undermining person-to-person relationships by making it all too easy to substitute the latter for the former. As Sherry Turkle has observed, “We expect more from technology and less from one another and seem increasingly drawn to technologies that provide the illusion companionship without the demands of relationship. Always-on/always-on-you devices provide three powerful fantasies: that we will always be heard; that we can put our attention wherever we want it to be; and that we never have to be alone. Indeed our new devices have turned being alone into a problem that can be solved.”
This is a powerful indictment of digitally based relationships, but other studies have found that an expansion of online relationships has not in fact led to a decline of traditional, face-to-face interactions or displaced traditional, nondigitized social relationships. Moreover, while involvement with social media sites absorbs a fair amount of time, it does not come at the expense of traditional face-to-face contacts. If anything is displaced, it is the time spent eating, sleeping, and watching television. All in all, the effects of digitally based social media seems remarkably similar to those in the early days of the telephone; despite widespread concerns at the time, chatting on the phone did not displace traditional modes of communication and socialization, If anything, telephone communications appear to have extended and intensified existing social relationships.

Social Media and Social Movements
Social networks can promote stability within a society by forging and strengthening linkages between individuals. At the same time, however, they can be powerful tools for undermining an existing social order. Turning individual grievances into a mass movement requires communication links to create a sense of common purpose, to forge a group identity, to inform participants of intended actions, and to schedule these actions. The power of social networks to do all of these was demonstrated in August 2011 after the death of a man who had been killed by London policemen in the course of a bungled arrest. After a day of rioting, some individuals began to use a smartphone app that made it possible to send the same message to everyone in their phone’s directory. The message was simple: it told them to congregate at a particular time and place so they could “linkup and cause havic (sic), just rob everything. Police can’t stop it.”
The looting conducted by the resultant flash mob was only one of many recent examples of collective action by individuals who coalesced and took action in accordance with mobile phone messages. Other mass movements energized by social media have been oriented toward political transformation rather than illegal personal enrichment. Up to now, the most far-reaching of these has been the use of social media to bring down the dictatorial regime of Hosni Mubarak in Egypt during the “Arab Spring” of 2011. At that time, hundreds of thousands of disaffected Egyptians had been regular readers of and contributors to Facebook pages that aired their grievances and motivated them to demonstrate against the government at particular times and places. Twitter feeds provided up-to-the minute information, and mobile phones served as crucial communication links during this turbulent period. For some of the insurgents, these new communication technologies have been viewed as powerful but nonviolent weapons for successfully challenging oppressive regimes and effecting political transformation. As the creator and administrator of the most influential Egyptian Facebook site put it:
    Now that so many people can easily connect with one another, the world is less hospitable to authoritarian regimes. Humanity will always be cursed with power-hungry people, and the rule of law and justice will not automatically flourish in all places at all times. But thanks to modern technology, participatory democracy is becoming a reality. Governments are finding it harder and harder to keep the people isolated from one another, to censor information, and to hide corruption and issue propaganda that goes unchallenged. Slowly but surely, the weapons of mass oppression are becoming extinct. 
Might this evaluation of new communications technologies be excessively optimistic? Social networking sites and mobile phones helped to create the collective identity and actions that rocked Egypt and other parts of the world, but it is important to note that they were an enabling factor, not an independent force for change. As ever, we have to avoid invoking implicit technological determinism that would make digital media autonomous sources of political change. In Egypt and other places where users of social media challenged the existing order, grievances had long festered within a significant portion of the population. The Mubarak regime was associated with decades of corruption, political repression, a stagnant economy, and severely limited opportunities for young people. It was a tinderbox waiting for a spark, which was supplied by the self-immolation of a young vegetable seller in Tunisia. New communication technologies helped to organize and energize the movement, but they did not start or sustain it. 
No less important, digital communication is a two-edged sword that can be a force for oppression as well as of liberation. Technologically sophisticated authoritarian regimes can tap into e-mail accounts and mine social networking sites in order to locate associates of known dissidents and to track their activities. They can also plant bogus Web pages, blogs, and videos to discredit their opponents. Also, it cannot be assumed that widespread connection to digital media will impart unity. Tweets, blogs, and instant messages are inherently decentralized communication modes, and their fragmented nature may prevent disaffected citizens from coalescing into a unified opposition movement.Even when the effective use of social media helps to foment a large-scale uprising, it is less useful for generating long-term purposive action, especially when this requires discipline, organization, and sacrifice. As Malcolm Gladwell has argued, Facebook and similar sites excel at constructing networks, but these are not permanent structures with well-defined individual responsibilities and unambiguous centers of authority. As seen by Gladwell, social networks are deficient when it comes to setting long-term goals and creating effective strategies for achieving them. The case of Egypt seems to bear out Gladwell’s critique. Mubarak and his henchmen were swept aside by a movement that involved millions of Egyptians, but after the dust had settled, the army was in control and democracy faced an uncertain future.In the broadest terms, the role of digital media in the Egypt revolution is reminiscent of the connection between printing and the Protestant reformation nearly five centuries earlier. Neither movement would have unfolded the way it did in the absence of new media, but much more has been involved than enhanced communications capabilities. Without denying their unquestioned importance in promoting social and political change, printing, social media, and mobile phones by themselves do not a revolution make.

Video Games
Social media sites are a major component of the Internet. Also significant are online games, which as we have seen, constitute a major use of the Internet. To these can be added the games downloaded on smartphones, tablets, and computers, along with the consoles and hand-held gaming devices found in more than half of American households. Originally limited to arcades or early adopters of personal computers, on-screen games now constitute a significant portion of leisure activity for many individuals. The technical development of video games has proceeded rapidly in recent years, providing amazingly realistic depictions of everything from bowling alleys to combat zones to rock concerts.
Once comprising little more than a cluster of cottage industries, the video game industry has become a very big business. The Entertainment Software Association, the industry’s trade group, reported that 257.2 million video and computer games were sold in 2011 and racking up revenues of $16.6 billion. Purchases of consoles and accessories added $9.23 billion. Globally, revenues generated by electronic games are now double those of the entire music industry and are one-quarter greater than those of the magazine business.
Although the typical video gamer is often envisaged as an adolescent boy, the audience for video games has gone well beyond this stereotype. The average age of gamers is 37, with 53 percent between the ages of 18 and 50. Women now comprise 42 percent of gamers, and it is worth noting that women over the age of 18 now comprise a larger percentage of gamers (37 percent) than do boys 17 and younger (13 percent) 
Of all the games sold in 2011, 26.5 percent fell into the “mature” category, which also encompassed 6 out of the top 10 sales of video games. There is no escaping the fact that games featuring violent action are an important source of revenue and profit. The most successful game of this genre, “Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 3,” brought in $775 million on the first five days of worldwide sales. Concerns about a possible connection between violent video games and real-life violence bring us back to some of the issues voiced by critics of televised violence. As is the case with televised violence, the influence of violent video games on behavior varies according to age, gender, and other individual and social variables. Gaming preferences also differ. Not only are males more likely to be video gamers, their choice of games tends to differ from those of female players. Males are drawn to sports and actiongames (not all of which are violent), while their female counterparts generally prefer strategic and puzzle games, although one study found no gender differences in regard to interest in adventure games. Other studies have found that girls and women tend to play for social interaction and to form relationships. In contrast, boys and men prefer games where winning is the most important outcome.
Although most players of violent video games are no more likely to commit acts of violence or aggression than individuals with milder gaming tastes, a number of studies have found positive correlations between playing violent video games and aggressive behavior, just as has been the case for television. For the majority of players, participation in violent on-screen activities may be “just a game,” but these games may catalyze aggressive and even violent acts for those who are already disposed toward this kind of behavior. 
Today’s video games have reached impressive levels of realism, so much so that some are now being used to prepare soldiers and the police to operate in dangerous and frightening situations. It is certainly possible that graphic on-screen violence can have a stronger and more lasting effect on the players of these games. Along with the realism that they bring, video games also require a level of attention and involvement that television viewing does not require. This greater degree of participation was highlighted in a report issued in 2001 by the U.S. Surgeon General, which speculated that video games might stimulate more aggressive and violent behavior than television viewing because the player is a participant in onscreen violence and not simply a vicarious consumer of it.
“Speculated” is the proper term here. Despite literally thousands of studies conducted over several decades, the link between television viewing and violent behavior remains a matter of some controversy; given the much shorter history of video games, a considerable amount of methodologically sophisticated research will be required before the consequences of violent gaming are fully comprehended. These reservations aside, an interesting negative correlation between the spread of video games and society-wide violence merits our consideration. The hypothesized connection between violent behavior and violent video games is belied by a substantial decrease in the rate of violent crime in the United States and most other countries in recent decades. The reasons for the drop in violent crime have been the subject of much debate, but this trend makes it hard to argue that violent video games have triggered a wave of violence across the land.
It should be noted at this point that the primary victims of video games are some of the players themselves. Although the American Psychiatric Association decided that existing research did not justify including video game addiction in the most recent edition of its Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, it is a problem for some individuals. Psychologists who have treated video game addiction note that the majority of their clients are young men under 30 with poor self-esteem and limited real-life social networks. They are especially drawn to role-playing games that allow them to assume a new identity as they inhabit a virtual world that is more appealing than the one in which they live. As with other addictions, video game addiction is characterized by the need to devote large amounts of time to gaming, withdrawal from other activities, and feelings of anger and depression when one is unable to play or prevented from doing so. Addiction to technology in general may be an inescapable part of modern life, but with excessive video game play, it may become self-destructive.
On a more positive note, some organizations have begun to experiment online with applying gaming mechanics as motivational devices in behavior change—for example, providing real or virtual rewards as a user completes a sequence of stages on the way to achieving a goal, often within a framework that encourages competition and interaction. The term used for this is “gamification,” which, according to its exponents, makes work and other activities more engaging and enjoyable.The awarding of points, badges, or other rewards for doing certain things and completing particular tasks is not a novel technique, of course; psychologists have long known that frequent feedback generally improves performance, whether it be of workers, students, or other participants. What is new about gamification is that it depends on the existence of social media and the drive for constant connectedness. Gamification also taps into a universal attribute of human culture; in virtually every kind of society, men and women and boys and girls play games of some sort. However, the extent to which human activities can be made to resemble games is open to question. The history of business strategies is replete with many examples of fads that achieve considerable popularity and influence, only to eventually fade away as their impracticality, triviality, and ineffectiveness become evident. Gamification may fall into this category, or it may flourish because its intended group of users has been involved with electronic games for much of their lives. 

The Digital Divide
A computer or smartphone and an Internet connection are all that is needed for buying things online, staying in touch with friends through e-mail, or using social media to foment revolution. But for many people, access to cyberspace remains limited at best. The Internet has been characterized as a highly democratic system of communication because it is not under centralized control, yet it continues to reflect inequalities within and between nations. According to statistics compiled at the end of 2011, although nearly one-third of the world’s population used the Internet to some extent, vast disparities existed within different regions of the world. To take one of the starkest contrasts, 78.6 percent of North America’s residents were Internet users, but only 13.5 percent of Africa’s population had this capability. To take another example of a great disparity in internet connectivity, 95.6 percent of the population of Iceland, the country with the greatest degree of Internet penetration, used the Internet, while only 1.3 percent of Cambodians could connect to the Internet in 2010.
As might be expected, all of the countries with high rates of Internet usage lie within the developed world, but substantial disparities in Internet usage can be found within these countries. Numerous critics have pointed to the “digital divide” that separates people with easy access to the Internet from those with no access. In the United States, Internet access in schools is virtually universal, but the ability to access it at home has differed according to race, ethnicity, and especially social class. According to the U.S. Department of Commerce, 71 percent of American households had an Internet connection in late 2010. Differences of race and ethnicity are evident but not massive; 72 percent of white households had an Internet connection, while 65 percent of African American and 67 percent of Hispanic households had one. Much more significant is financial status; 93 percent of households with incomes over $100,000 were connected, far more than the 43 percent of households with incomes under $25,000. Geographical location is also significant; 70 percent of urban households have an Internet connection, whereas only 57 percent of rural households are connected.
The way that different groups log onto the Internet also shows some interesting differences. The growth of smartphone ownership has created a new way to access the Internet. African Americans and Latinos are slightly more likely than whites to own a smartphone (although much of this disparity is likely due to the higher average age of the white population), and they are more likely to use these devices to access the Internet. This, however, may result in the “walled garden” phenomenon whereby control by mobile carriers, which are not governed by net neutrality laws, results in more limited access to the Internet, as when content deemed “controversial or unsavory” has on occasion been blocked by mobile carriers that serve as ISPs.In a world where the ability to acquire and make use of information has taken on increasing importance, the Internet has the potential to empower people by making information more accessible than it ever has been. But the Internet is not a technological fix. As we have just seen, while the Internet has been a revolutionary technology, access to it also reflects prevailing social and economic conditions. Perhaps of equal importance, even with widespread access to the Internet there remain significant disparities in the ability to make effective use of it. In the absence of parallel social changes, the Internet may intensify rather than diminish global and national social inequalities.

Intellectual Property
One of the most contentious issues surrounding the use of computer networks has been the innocuous-sounding practice of file sharing. In this context, a file can be anything in a digital format—text, sound, or pictures. No one objects when people use the Internet to send a Christmas letter or a photograph of a new grandchild to friends and family, but a host of legal and commercial issues arise when a DVD movie or the contents of a music CD are sent to members of a file-sharing service. At the heart of the matter is intellectual property, the ownership of a product of one’s creativity, such as a novel or a musical performance. Printed works, music, and movies intended for commercial use are protected by copyrights, which prevent the unauthorized use of the material and usually require the payment of fees when they are legally used. Governments grant copyrights for the same reason that they issue patents: both are thought to stimulate creative efforts by giving individuals and firms monopoly control over their creations, and with it the chance to reap financial rewards.
In previous decades, the development of radio, television, movies, and recorded music greatly expanded the commercial value of creative efforts. Generations of actors, artists, musicians, and others have owed their livelihoods to the media in its various forms, but more recent technologies have been more problematic, and their use has exemplified the ways in which new technologies may create winners and losers, as noted in Chapter 1. One early example is the videocassette recorder (VCR). When the VCR first came out, it was thought that its primary function would be the playing of prerecorded tapes of movies rented from video stores. But many VCR owners also used their machines to record programs that had been broadcast on commercial television. The movie industry sued the manufacturers of VCRs and videotapes, claiming copyright infringement. In a case that eventually went all the way up to the U.S. Supreme Court, the court ruled in 1984 by a 5 to 4 margin that home recording constituted “fair use” under existing copyright laws, allowing individuals to videotape with impunity.In the late 1990s the rapid spread of computer networks presented a new challenge to existing conceptions of intellectual property, because after being compressed and digitally encoded, a musical selection could be sent to anyone with a networked computer and the requisite software. By the start of the new century, 60 million persons were sharing music that was being routed through Napster, the most prominent file-sharing service. This was done by connecting one’s computer to Napster’s network servers, which kept a list of all the music that was available on clients’ computers in the MP3 format. Napster and its clients claimed that all that was going on was the sharing of files by private parties, which constituted “fair use” under existing copyright laws. But the courts did not agree, ruling that Napster’s central database of music titles gave it primary responsibility for what was deemed illegal downloading. Napster tried to reconstitute itself as a commercial distributor of digitized music, but it failed to survive in this guise. Napster’s demise did not put an end to file sharing. New services allowed individuals to access music residing in millions of hard disks but avoided the legal problems caused by a central database through the use of the network itself to channel requests and to inform users of available music, movies, and other digitized files. 
The rise of file sharing coincided with a significant drop in CD sales, but there is no agreement that this reflected a cause-and-effect relationship. As might be expected, the music industry attributed falling sales to widespread “piracy” and claimed that the very survival of the music industry depended on the suppression of unauthorized file sharing. Although the person-to-person transfer of files was a common occurrence, the industry may have overstated its impact; one methodologically sophisticated study concluded that unauthorized file sharing had only a minimal effect on CD sales.Falling CD sales, it was argued, were the result of high prices, the lack of new and interesting music, and the appeal of alternative forms of entertainment such as video games, smartphones, tablet computers, and movies on demand. The claim even was made that file sharing actually promotes CD sales by exposing potential buyers to new music and musicians, much as radio airplay has stimulated record sales for decades.In 2011 the entertainment industry attempted to regain control over its products through the introduction of the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA) and the Protect Intellectual Property Act (PIPA) in the U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate, respectively. If enacted as laws, these bills would have penalized third-party Internet firms such as Google and Facebook for providing access to sites offering pirated material. Internet firms fought back in a number of ways, including a one-day shutdown by Wikipedia, and the bills were withdrawn. This was not the end of the story, however, and the coming years surely will see more legislative efforts to curtail online piracy.
Meanwhile, growing numbers of individuals are subscribing to fee-based services that allow them to stream or download music and movies without fear of legal reprisals. The services provided by iTunes, Rhapsody, Amazon, and others have been stunning commercial successes. Apple, which had pioneered the sale of downloaded music for its line of iPods, tallied its 10 billionth iTune download in early 2010. The growth of these enterprises has cut into the practice of unauthorized file sharing. After all, it doesn’t require much of a financial commitment, usually less than a dollar, to obtain a hit song. Legal streaming (which entails the one-time viewing of a movie or music) and downloading also retain a key advantage of illegal downloading—the convenience of instantly acquiring a song without having to go to a store or wait for a mail delivery. But piracy, although diminished, has not gone away, and the fate of file sharing will ultimately depend on legal decisions, corporate strategies, and consumer tastes. In the meantime, the controversy over file sharing provides a good illustration of how technological change can be intimately connected to some fundamental human concerns: freedom, money, and power.

Privacy in the Digital Age
As has been noted several times in this book, few technologies are unalloyed blessings; problems usually accompany advances. For example, we saw in Chapter 9 that modern genetics, in addition to being the basis of new medical treatments, also can provide intimate information about individuals, everything from hitherto unknown family relationships to propensities to contract certain diseases. Such is also the case with the wired world. All of the communications technologies covered in this chapter have the potential to undermine personal privacy, sometimes seriously. As users of e-mail messages know (or should know) an e-mail message is more like a postcard than a letter. Its contents can be easily accessed and used against the sender or receiver. The use of social media and Internet search engines leaves a record that contains quite a lot of information about the user. These can create new marketing possibilities, but sometimes at the expense of individual privacy. Facebook users were outraged in 2007 when they discovered that the social networking site was tracking their activities on participating websites and reporting them to their Facebook friends.
An online petition involving tens of thousands of users ended these practices, but the threat to privacy for users of social network sites remains. One of the site’s chief commercial attractions is the wealth of information that its pages offer to marketers, but the use of this information by marketers could constitute an invasion of personal privacy. Facebook was cited by the Federal Trade Commission in 2011 over the violation of promises to users that their privacy would be respected. This resulted in a settlement whereby Facebook agreed to a number of stipulations aimed at protecting the privacy of its users and to monitoring by the FTC of its practices for 20 years. But the fact remains that Facebook pages contain massive amounts of personal data that marketers of every description intensely covet. Reconciling Facebook’s commercial appeal with user privacy will be a difficult balancing act.
Social media are hardly the only source of assaults on privacy. Keeping private information out of the hands of marketers and others will pose continual challenges for everyone who lives in the digital era. For example, certain recently manufactured cell phones are capable of secretly recording keystrokes made when placing telephone calls and sending text messages. The recording of keystrokes, or “keylogging” as it is known, has been used by the police in a few organized crime cases, but it can also be used for clandestine eavesdropping by private parties. The emerging technology of Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) gives governments, businesses, and individuals the ability to track the movements of people who have RFID tags incorporated into their passports, drivers’ licenses, credit cards, employee access badges, student ID cards, and even library cards. Word processing documents may contain hidden “metadata” such as the name of the writer and the type of computer that was used. The installation of a GPS device on a person’s car also offers new opportunities to know the whereabouts of an individual, although the U.S. Supreme Court, in the first decision regarding digital searches, ruled that such an action requires a court order. Finally, drones, also known as unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), offer many opportunities for spying on people and places. Border control agents and some police forces are beginning to use them as inexpensive substitutes for manned helicopters. It is also possible for members of the public to buy or build their own drones for a few hundred dollars.
One computer entrepreneur has famously claimed, “You already have zero privacy. Get over it.” It can be safely countered that this statement is not entirely true today, for there are many defenses against privacy-invading technologies. But those of a pessimistic disposition may argue that this obituary for personal privacy, while not completely applicable today, is not wrong, only premature.

The Electronic Media in Modern Society
In considering the consequences of electronic media, beginning with radio and television, and continuing with the numerous forms of digital media available today, we are left with many unresolved issues. As with other major technological changes, the electronic media have advanced in conjunction with other historical changes, making it very difficult to come to an exact reckoning of their unique contributions to culture and society. To put it slightly differently, to understand the influence of the electronic media, it is necessary to consider the larger contexts within which they emerged and diffused.
The electronic media are only the latest in a series of technologies that have expanded our ability to communicate with one another. As human societies have expanded in size, complexity, and mobility, the need to tie them together through improved communications media has increased apace. As we have seen, visionaries described technologies that would transmit sounds and pictures over great distances long before the realization of these dreams was technically possible. Even so, as we have seen in earlier chapters, the need for something does not ensure that it eventuallywill be produced. The technical capacity has to be created, and individuals and organizations have to come forward with money and other resources to support it. One of the major reasons for the success of radio, television, and the Internet can be found in the solid financial support that they attracted. During its early years, radio advanced because military, governmental, and business organizations perceived its relevance to their needs. Later, the profit-making potential of radio and then television was eagerly exploited, and the market created by commercial broadcasting further stimulated technological development. More recently, the Internet began as a creation of the military, was further developed as a means of business and personal communication, and toward the end of the twentieth century emerged as a popular medium with seemingly endless commercial possibilities. In the opening years of the twenty-first century there has been a massive expansion in the products and services tied to the Internet, and we surely have not seen the last of it.
The electronic media have become essential features of modern life because they have helped to mitigate the disruption of stable community ties that has been a prominent feature of the modern era. Economic and social changes have produced a great deal of social and geographic mobility, as well as corresponding feelings of rootlessness. In response, first radio and then television contributed to the construction of a common culture that served as at least a partial substitute for attenuated local ties. The effects of the Internet, social media, and other digital media are less easily characterized. Whereas television and radio formerly attracted large audiences through the broadcasting of a small range of programs, cable television and some of the key products of the Internet—websites, blogs, tweets, and social networks—are engaged in “narrowcasting” that plays to a much more limited audience. The consequences of audience segmentation are still somewhat speculative, but there can be little doubt that they have contributed to the political and cultural polarization that is characteristic of our times. Although participants in social media sites may list hundreds of “friends,” a virtual community is not the same as one based on long-lasting face-to-face relationships. As we have seen, person-to-person media such as the telephone and Facebook can strengthen existing social connections, but they should not be seen as substitutes for them. The loosening of local ties has not been reversed by the spread of new media, and according to some social scientists we have become an increasingly individualized society. For many people the electronic media have filled a void by bringing information, entertainment, and new means of communication that have helped to mitigate weakened connections to family, friends, and community. These media can be characterized as “technological fixes,” and as we saw in Chapter 2, technology cannot always fix problems that are social rather than technical in nature.