Today’s technology leaves us both exhilarated and terrified. Recent technological developments have presented us with such marvels as spacecraft leaving the solar system, instant access to billions of Internet Web pages, and diseases cured through gene therapy. At the same time, however, the seemingly inexorable march of technology has produced global pollution, overpopulation, and the threat of nuclear annihilation. On many occasions technological change has also produced social disruptions, as when automation destroys jobs in a particular industry or a new weapon upsets the balance of power between nations. And when technologies fail, some of them do so in a big way, as exemplified by the loss of the Challenger andColumbia space shuttles, the massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, the catastrophic failure of the Fukushima nuclear plant in Japan, and the disastrous breaching of the levees in New Orleans in the wake of Hurricane Katrina.
Despite all the crises, disruptions, and disasters that have accompanied it, modern technology is still viewed in a favorable light, according to public opinion surveys. Although significant minorities of respondents express their disapproval of certain technologies like nuclear power and genetically modified foods, the positive achievements of technology as a whole are seen to substantially outweigh the negative ones.1 But this support of technology is based more on faith than on understanding. When confronting technology, most of us are poorly informed spectators, seemingly incapable of understanding an esoteric realm of lasers, microprocessors, gene splicing, and nanomaterials. 
This inability to understand technology and perceive its effects on our society and on ourselves is one of the greatest, if most subtle, problems of an age that has been so heavily influenced by technological change.2 But ignorance need not be a permanent condition. Although no one can hope to comprehend the inner workings of even a small number of the most significant technologies, it is still possible to come to a better understanding of the major causes and consequences of technological change. All technologies, be they high-definition televisions or reinforced concrete bridges, have some basic features in common. It will be the task of this chapter to show what they are.

Gaining an understanding of the meaning of words is often the beginning of knowledge. Before plunging into a discussion of the nature of technology, it is necessary to provide a more precise definition of what is meant when we use the term. The linguistic roots of the word “technology” can be traced to the IndoEuropean stem tekhn-, which seems to have referred to woodworking. It is the source of the Greek word tekne, which can be variously translated as “art,” “craft,” or “skill.” It is also the root of the Latin word texere, “to weave,” which eventually took on the larger meaning of fabrication or construction. The term “technologist” was occasionally used by Aristotle and others of his time, but in their usage it referred to a grammarian or rhetorician. By the early eighteenth century the word had come close to its present meaning when an English dictionary defined it as “a Description of Arts, especially the Mechanical.” In 1831 Jacob Bigelow published Elements of Technology, the first book in English with the word “technology” in its title. As he defined it, technology consisted of “the principles, processes, and nomenclatures of the more conspicuous arts, particularly those which involve applications of science.”
Technologies are developed and applied so that we can do things not otherwise possible, or so that we can do them cheaper, faster, and more easily. The capacity of human beings to employ technologies sets us apart from other creatures. To be sure, beavers build dams, otters crack open shellfish with rocks, and chimpanzees use sticks to extract termites from their nests. But no other animal comes close to humans in the ability to create tools and techniques—the first two elements in our definition of technology—and no other creature is so dependent on them. The development of technology is in large measure responsible for the survival and expansion of a species that lacks many of the innate abilities of other animals. Left with only their innate physical capabilities, humans cannot match the speed of a cheetah, the strength of an elephant, or the leaping ability of a kangaroo. They do not possess the eyesight of an eagle or the defensive armament of a porcupine, and they are among the 25 percent of all species that are incapable of flying. All in all, humankind is a physically puny bunch. But compensating for this physical weakness is an intelligence that is the ultimate source of technology. Humans stand apart from all other animals in their ability to gain and transmit knowledge, and to use this knowledge to develop tools and techniques. Without this capacity to invent and use a great variety of technologies, members of the human species would have never been able to establish themselves on virtually every part of the globe.
Reliance on technology is as old as humanity itself. Whatever evils have accompanied the use of particular technologies, it is pointless to indict technology as being somehow “unnatural.” Our past as well as our future as a species is inextricably linked to our capacity to shape our existence through the invention and application of implements and techniques that allow us to transcend our meager physical endowments. It is certainly true, as Jacob Bronowski observed, that “to quarrel with technology is to quarrel with the nature of man—just as if we were to quarrel with his upright gait, his symbolic imagination, his faculty for speech, or his unusual sexual posture and appetite.”
Tools and techniques have been of unquestioned importance in allowing the physical survival of the human species. Still, they are not the whole story. It is necessary to add some elements to our definition of technology that go beyond the usual identification of technology with pieces of hardware and ways of manipulating them. The first of these is organization. This follows from the fact that the development, production, and employment of particular technologies require a group effort. Even a relatively simple technology, such as one centering on the use of earthenware pots, requires a complex network of material suppliers, potters, tool makers, marketing agents, and consumers capable of making good use of the pots. Of course, one person can learn all these skills adequately if not expertly, but the day is not long enough for him or her to do them all on a scale that produces a reasonable degree of efficiency. In the case of a complex technology like a computerized manufacturing system, there is no possibility of a single individual developing even a tiny fraction of the requisite skills. For a technology to be developed and used, the energies and skills of many individuals have to be combined and coordinated through some organizational structure. Organization may be likened to the software that controls and guides a computer; without an operating system and application programs, a computer is a useless arrangement of capacitors, transistors, resistors, and other bits of hardware. In similar fashion, an organizational structure allows the integration of diffuse human and material inputs for the attainment of particular tasks. From this standpoint, there is considerable merit in Lewis Mumford’s assertion that the first “machine” was not a physical object, but the organizational structures that the Egyptian pharaohs employed to build the pyramids.When technology is seen as a combination of devices, skills, and organizational structures, it becomes natural to think of it as a system, the next element in our definition. For an individual technology to operate effectively, more is required than the invention of a particular piece of hardware; it has to be supported by other elements that are systematically interconnected. When Thomas Edison began to work on electrical illumination, he realized that this technology would require the development of such a system. The invention of a practical, longlasting light bulb rested on the development of a serviceable filament and the use of an improved vacuum pump that evacuated the interior of the bulb, thereby preventing the combustion of the filament. But by itself, a light bulb was useless. An effective electrical generator was needed to supply the current that produced the incandescence of the filament. A network of electrical lines had to be strung up between the generator and individual homes, shops, and factories. And metering devices were necessary so that users could be accurately billed for the electricity they used. Edison and his associates worked out all of these problems, and in so doing brought large-scale electrical illumination to the world.
The development of all the elements of a technological system can be an uneven process, for technological advance often entails the resolution of tensions that are generated when one part of the technological system changes. This process is exemplified by the development of the modern airplane. Early biplanes with their drag-inducing wires and struts could not make effective use of more powerful engines. The availability of these engines became a strong inducement to the design of aerodynamically cleaner aircraft. The faster aircraft that resulted from the marriage of streamlined airframes and powerful engines produced a new problem: dangerously high landing speeds. This, in turn, stimulated the invention of wing flaps and slots. By the 1940s it had become apparent that improved airframes could achieve still higher speeds if provided with more powerful engines; this possibility gave a strong stimulus to the development of the turbojet.
For an example of the interplay of devices, skills, and organizational patterns, we can take note of Lewis Mumford’s analysis of the technology of handwriting.8Two hundred years ago, the standard writing instrument was a goose-quill pen. Based on an organic product and sharpened by the user, it represented the handicraft technologies typical of its time. Cheap and crude, it called for a fair degree of skill if it was to be used effectively. In contrast, the steel-nib pen of the nineteenth century was a typical artifact of the industrial age, the product of a complex manufacturing process. Less adaptable than the quill, it was mass-produced in many different forms in order to meet specialized needs. Although Mumford’s ideas were formulated before the invention of the ballpoint pen in the 1940s, his analysis fits this implement perfectly. Made from a variety of artificial materials and manufactured to close tolerances, the ballpoint pen could only be produced through sophisticated industrial processes. It is completely divorced from the organic world and requires very little skill from its user. Indeed, the technological artistry embodied in the pen itself stands in sharp contrast to the poor quality of the writing that so often comes from the hand that wields it. 
A technological system does not emerge all at once with every one of its components neatly fitting together. In addition to changes in tools, techniques, and organizational structures, many social, psychological, economic, and political adjustments may be required for the support of a technological system. Technological change is not always a smooth process, and many of the necessary changes may entail considerable pain and disruption. Seeing technology as a system should help us to understand that technological change is closely connected with a variety of associated changes, and that the creation of a technological system may be fraught with tension and discomfort. 
Much of what has just been said can be incorporated into a schematic definition of technology: a system created by humans that uses knowledge and organization to produce objects and techniques for the attainment of specific goals.Useful as it may be, this definition of technology is incomplete and possibly misleading in one important respect. The last part of the definition implies that technological change comes about as a response to existing needs: its purpose is “the attainment of specific goals.” In the first place, one could legitimately ask whose goals are to be attained. This is an important issue, but it is best left for the next chapter. For now, we should note that although it is a human creation, technology does not always respond to existing needs; a new technology may in fact create its own needs. The development of technology on occasion exemplifies a phenomenon that has been dubbed “the law of the hammer”: give a six-year-old a hammer, and to the child everything starts looking like a nail. 
The history of technology is replete with examples of inventions looking for problems to solve. One example that illustrates this point is found in almost every medicine chest: a bottle of aspirin. One of the most common uses of aspirin is to suppress fevers that accompany various illnesses. But recent medical research (as well as some ancient practices) has demonstrated that running a fever is a therapeutic process that aids in a patient’s recovery; it is the body’s way of naturally combating infection. Yet since the introduction of aspirin in the early 1900s, fever has been seen as a problem requiring intervention. As one medical researcher has noted, “It’s no surprise that society’s deep worries about fever closely followed the synthesis of aspirin, the first drug that could safely reduce it.”9 In short, a new technology created its own need. 
It is also important to note that the goals achieved through the use of a technology do not have to be “practical” ones. Some technologies have been developed so that we can grow more food or construct more comfortable buildings, but others have been developed simply for the challenge and enjoyment of solving technological problems,10 a proclivity that Robert Post has described as “technological enthusiasm.”11 The prodigious efforts that went into the Daedalus Project, a successful attempt to build a human-powered aircraft capable of flying forty miles across the open sea, were certainly not motivated by an effort to produce a new form of transportation. A major reason for creating the aircraft was that its construction posed an intriguing technological challenge to those who designed, built, and flew it. 
Flight seems to be a particularly attractive object for this kind of spirit. Immensely expensive technological endeavors such as the supersonic Concorde airliner and manned space exploration programs are hard to justify on practical grounds, although their supporters have made valiant efforts to do so. Their primary purpose seems to be the elevation of national prestige by demonstrating a nation’s collective ability to solve daunting technological problems. At the same time, many other technologies have a dual nature; they serve a practical purpose, but they are not valued only for this reason. An outstanding example is the automobile. It would be hard to justify the enormous resources employed for the building and operation of cars if transportation were the only goal. For many people (the author included), cars are objects of inherent fascination. Technological features like variable valve timing and active suspension systems have little to do with utilitarian transportation. The appeal is at least as much in the sophisticated technologies themselves as in the purposes that they serve.

The development of technology is an inherently dynamic and cumulative process. It is dynamic because a technology is never perfect; there is always room for improvement. As Henry Ford said of his firm, “If we have a tradition it is this: Everything can always be done faster and better.”12 It is cumulative, for one advance paves the way for another. The lessons learned in working with an existing technology very often provide materials, tools, and, most importantly, a knowledge base for the next stage of development. 
The dynamic and cumulative nature of technological change sets it apart from many other human endeavors. Ignoring for the moment the social consequences of technology, the process of technological change is usually one of continuous improvement in the internal workings of a particular technology: as they evolve, engines develop more power and are more efficient, integrated electronic circuits pack more components on a single chip, aircraft fly higher and faster.
The process of technological advance can be graphically portrayed according to the following diagram, in which the horizontal axis represents time and the vertical axis represents just about any aspect of technological advance: the speed of commercial airliners, the production of synthetic materials, or the number of articles in engineering journals. Although there are inevitable fits and starts over time, the general trend can be depicted as a sigmoid, or S-shaped curve: 
Note that at first the curve rises rather slowly, inclines steeply in the middle, and then begins to slow down. That is, after an initial period of slow growth, the rate of advance accelerates, reaches a maximum, and then begins to proceed at a slower pace but never completely levels off. Although the rate of increase is smaller as the curve moves toward the right, this rate is applied to an increasingly larger base, so the actual addition is still substantial.
Not all human endeavors can be fitted to this sort of curve. While technology tends to be dynamic and cumulative, the same cannot always be said of other manifestations of human creativity. Although there is ample room for debate, a good case can be made that succeeding generations of writers, composers, and painters have not produced works superior to the ones created by Shakespeare, Beethoven, and Vermeer. And while we continue to take great pleasure in the artistic creations of eras long past, few of us would be satisfied with the technologies that were prevalent in those times. We also see few indications that people are more humane than they were centuries ago. The present era certainly provides a multitude of horrifying examples of human cruelty, many of them augmented by enlisting technology in the service of slaughter and destruction. 
Still, when judged solely according to internal criteria, technology is one of the best examples of humankind’s largely unrealized dream of continual progress. Technological progress, however, is not the same thing as progress in general. The fact that a society is able to develop and make use of advanced technologies does not guarantee that it will be equally advanced in other areas.13 Nazi Germany produced many technological triumphs, such as the all-conquering Mercedes and Auto Union grand prix racing cars of the late 1930s and the V-2 rocket used during World War II, but in its ideology and treatment of people it can only be described as barbaric. Conversely, many technologically primitive peoples have exhibited a high level of sophistication in their artistic creations, religious beliefs, and social relationships. The term “progress” can be used with some precision when applied to the development of technology per se, although even here problems can crop up because different standards of evaluation may lead to conflicting conclusions. Is it really “progress” when a new medical technology maintains an individual’s life, but does so only at enormous expense while preserving nothing but the maintenance of organic functions? Does maintaining a “life” of this sort justify expenditures that otherwise might be used for expanded prenatal care or other preventative measures? Given all of the value judgments, ambiguities, and complexities surrounding the word “progress,” its use is avoided here unless its meaning is clearly defined.

Despite these qualifications, it is evident that beginning in the late eighteenth century and continuing today, technology’s stunning advances have fueled a belief in generalized human progress. In this way, technology has operated as a metaphor—the transference of an idea from one area to another. Technology has provided many other metaphors that have affected our way of looking at ourselves and the world, as when human thought is made analogous to the operation of a digital computer.
A further example of the power of a technology to shape our way of thinking comes from the late eighteenth century. At that time the designers of windmills and steam engines discovered the important principle of feedback, which the great twentieth-century mathematician Norbert Wiener defined as “a method of controlling a system by reinserting in it the results of its past performance.”14 When a steam engine begins to rotate too rapidly, a feedback device such as a flyball governor closes the valve that admits the steam, thereby bringing the engine back into its proper operating range. When it slows down, the reverse happens, and the governor opens the valve to admit more steam.
During the late eighteenth century the feedback principle offered a suggestive metaphor for the workings of the economic system: instead of being guided by a centralized authority, an economy might best be organized through the operation of a self-regulating market, with the actions of independent buyers and sellers providing the feedback. Thus, when buyers wanted a particular commodity, its price would be high, motivating sellers to produce more of it. If the price were low, less would be produced. In similar fashion, an increase in production would cause the price of a commodity to fall, so more of it would be purchased, while a drop in production would cause the price to rise, leading to a reduction of purchases. In this way, the actions of buyers and sellers in the market provide a feedback mechanism through which supply and demand are supposedly brought into equilibrium. It is probably no coincidence that the Scottish economist Adam Smith developed this basic concept at the same time that the steam engine was being put into service.15 Today, the widespread use of the feedback principle makes its apparent applicability to the economic system even more appealing, even though the real-world economy is hardly a neat closed system like a steam engine. Laws and regulations as well as a host of other extraneous elements may strongly affect individual feedback loops, thereby preventing a complex economy from operating solely on the basis of supply-and-demand signals. Technological development has supplied a useful metaphor in the feedback principle, but like all metaphors it cannot be taken as a literal depiction of reality. 

The development of technology has stimulated a belief that progress is a natural part of human life. At the same time, the progressive development of technology has itself been the product of a distinctive set of cultural values and mental processes that are characterized by a rational approach to the world and how it is to be controlled. Technological development is more than the random accumulation of tools, techniques, and organizational forms. Underlying the process is a set of attitudes and orientations that are collectively described as “rational.” 
What makes a technologically progressive society different from others is that its methods of problem solving are oriented toward an objective scrutiny of the problem at hand, coupled with a systematic, empirically based examination of possible solutions and a logical selection of the most appropriate ones. Beyond this approach to the solution of problems lies another cultural attribute: the belief that solutions are possible and that constant changes are necessary in order to realize them. A society imbued with a rational ethos is dynamic and essentially optimistic, and it exhibits the confidence necessary to alter existing ways of doing things in order to gain particular benefits. 
These abstract concepts may be illustrated through a simple example. All societies are faced with the problem of coping with the capriciousness of the weather. A great deal of human suffering has been the result of the vagaries of rainfall, and history provides many examples of the tragic consequences of drought. A number of responses are possible when people are confronted with this problem. The simplest is to succumb to despair, and perhaps try to find meaning in it by attributing the drought to fate or God’s will. A more active approach might be to offer prayers, perform a special ceremony, or sacrifice a member of the community. These latter activities are not likely to meet with success. There is no logical or empirically verifiable connection between them and the circumstances that produced the drought, a fact that could be demonstrated by a systematic inquiry into the long-term connection between prayers, ceremonies, or human sacrifices and the incidence of rainfall. 
Attitudes and behaviors of this sort stand in sharp contrast with rational ones. Through the use of logic and empirical observation, it is possible to develop ways of dealing with problems like drought that are both more effective and more closely connected to the way the world actually works. A systematic and empirical observation of weather patterns might allow the prediction of a drought so that necessary steps can be taken to alter farming practices and conserve water. Other solutions could be the development of drought-resistant crops, improved methods of conserving water, and the distillation of sea water. It might also be possible to artificially stimulate rainfall through cloud seeding. In short, a rational approach to problem solving is continuously concerned with identifying and developing appropriate means for achieving particular ends. 
These remarks are not meant to convey the ethnocentric belief that modern Western culture is superior to all others. The intention here is not to ridicule the beliefs and practices of people and societies that use nonrational approaches to problem solving. There is no reason to believe that rationality has been and always will be the special attribute of a particular group of people. Moreover, modern societies often manifest behaviors and patterns of thought that are anything but rational, as when large numbers of people continue to find value in astrology, numerology, and the predictions of supposed psychics. 
It is also important to recognize that rational ways of thinking do not confer moral superiority. To the contrary, the rigorous development and use of rational procedures can be accompanied by major moral and ethical transgressions. The rational method of problem solving, with its overarching concern for devising appropriate means for attaining particular ends, makes no distinction concerning the ends being pursued. There is nothing in the rational approach to the world that prevents the use of logically and empirically derived means in the service of goals that are neither rational nor ethically justifiable. We can take note of the words of Captain Ahab, the main figure in Herman Melville’s novel Moby Dick: “All my means are sane, my motive and subject mad.” Nazi Germany provides many ghastly historical examples of human destruction ensuing from rational thinking and its resultant technologies. As Albert Speer, Hitler’s Minister of Armaments, ruefully noted, “The criminal events of these years were not only an outgrowth of Hitler’s personality. The extent of the crimes was also due to the fact that Hitler was the first to be able to employ the implements of technology to multiply crime.”
Even when rationality is not used for manifestly immoral purposes, it can still leave a dubious spiritual legacy. The very strength of rationality and the scientific and technological accomplishments that flow from it lie in their matter-of-fact approach to the world. A rational approach to things is often accompanied by a reluctance to admit there are any forces incapable of withstanding logical and empirical scrutiny. As the great German sociologist Max Weber put it, the world defined by rational thought processes had become “disenchanted,” for it was bereft of the gods, genies, and spiritual forces that people not imbued with the spirit of rationality used to explain their world.17 But “disenchantment” is a two-edged sword, as the everyday meaning of the word makes clear. To be disenchanted is to lose the sense of awe, commitment, and loyalty that is a necessary part of a meaningful existence. Weber’s melancholy analysis of a world that has lost its enchantment is summarized by the French sociologist Julian Freund:
With the progress of science and technology, man has stopped believing in magic powers, in spirits and demons; he has lost his sense of prophecy and, above all, his sense of the sacred. Reality has become dreary, flat and utilitarian, leaving a great void in the souls of men which they seek to fill by furious activity and through various devices and substitutes.
Similar misgivings were voiced by the eighteenth-century political philosopher Edmund Burke. Burke’s primary concern was the destruction of traditional authority by modern mass movements, as exemplified by the French Revolution. Burke attributed much of the demonic energy of that movement to the spread of rational modes of thought that left no room for the traditional attitudes, values, and political structures that had long sustained European civilization. Burke’s comment on the downfall of the queen of France, Marie Antoinette, thus contains a sharp indictment of the bearers of rational values who, in his estimation, were leading Europe to its doom:
Little did I dream that I should have lived to see such disasters fallen upon her in a nation of gallant men, in a nation of men of honor and of cavaliers. I thought ten thousand swords must have leaped from their scabbards to avenge even a look that threatened her with insult. But the age of chivalry is gone. That of sophisters, economists, and calculators, has succeeded; and the glory of Europe is extinguished forever.
Rationality also implies objectivity; coolness and detachment are part of the rational approach to understanding and changing the world. Guided by a rational outlook, scientific inquiry and technological application are usually based on the abstraction or isolation of the part of the natural world that is being studied or manipulated. This isn’t always a good thing, for it can produce a sharp separation between the individual and the rest of the world. The scientist or technologist stands apart from the system that is being studied and manipulated, resulting in a kind of tunnel vision that all too often ignores the larger consequences of gaining and applying knowledge.20 For example, in discovering a genetic marker for a serious disease, a researcher might not consider potential abuses of that discovery, such as insurance companies refusing coverage of people with that marker.
It also may be argued that a logical, detached, and dispassionate approach to the world is suffused with a “masculine” approach to understanding and interacting with the world. Some technologies have largely been a male domain, but throughout history women also have made significant contributions to technological advance.21 The complex relationship of gender and technology is illustrated by the history of the technological artifact most strongly associated with the present era, the digital computer. Its development has generally been viewed as the product of hyper-rational male engineers, mathematicians, scientists, and technicians. In reality, many of the programmers of first-generation computers were women whose accomplishments have often been passed over in standard histories.22 More recently, the development of computer technology has depended on thought processes that are relentlessly rational, objective, and logical, but at the same time has required an intuitive, interactive, and generally less structured approach.23 This is not to say that either style is the exclusive province of men or women, only that technological advance often requires both approaches. Equally important, although these modes of thinking may be described in gender terms, they need not reflect the cognitive approaches of individual men and women. 

Nothing worthwhile in life comes without some costs attached. So it is with technology; while it has expanded human power and made our lives materially richer, the advance of technology has created many problems—environmental degradation, alienation, and the threat of nuclear annihilation, to name only the most obvious ones. And, most bothersome of all, there looms the possibility that technology is out of control. If this is so, what began more than a million years ago as a human creation has taken on a life of its own, with technology advancing according to its own inner dynamic, unrestrained by social arrangements, systems of governance, culture, and thought.24 The belief that technology acts as an independent force in our life, unaffected by social forces, is known as “technological determinism,” and if it is true, we have become the servant of technology instead of its master. 
There can be little question that technology exerts a great influence on social, political, and economic relationships. Everything from antibiotics to zippers has affected our lives to some degree; many of these influences will be explored in subsequent portions of this book. But that is not the end of the story. As will be explored at greater length in Chapter 3, students of technology have given extensive consideration to the opposite possibility, that instead of operating as an independent force, technology is shaped by social arrangements. According to social constructivists (adherents of the Social Construction of Technology approach), the emergence of particular technologies, choices between competing technologies, and the way these technologies are actually used owe a great deal to socially grounded forces like political power, social class, gender, and organizational dynamics. 
Asserting the supremacy of either technological determinism or social constructivism is not a very useful activity. Such straightforward cause-and-effect relationships can be found in some realms—Newtonian physics, for example—but technological and social change is better understood in terms of probabilities, reciprocal interactions, and feedback loops. Even William F. Ogburn, a sociologist who is often characterized as a technological determinist, on occasion took a more nuanced view of the subject: “The whole interconnected mass [i.e., social institutions, customs, technology, and science] is in motion. When each part is in motion and banging up against some other part, the question of origins seems artificial and unrealistic. If one pushes the question to the extreme, origins are lost in a maze of causative factors.”
The wondrously complicated interactions of technology and society often result in unimagined consequences when new technologies emerge. To take one example, when the first digital computers appeared in the mid-1940s, they elicited modest expectations about their future applications. Today, the world as we know it is almost unimaginable without computers, as everything from air travel to the mapping of genomes is totally dependent on the storage, retrieval, and manipulation of information performed by computers. Accordingly, the history of the computer would seem to lend credence to technological determinism. Nobody saw it coming in the 1940s, but within a few decades the computer had become a universal and essential part of contemporary life. 
This is the story from a technological determinist standpoint, but social constructivists would challenge it by noting that the technical development of the computer in the 1950s and 1960s was heavily supported by military expenditures, just as one of today’s major computer applications, the Internet, was initially a creation of the U.S. Department of Defense. Someone taking a social constructivist approach might also point out that the expansion of the market for computers was also powerfully stimulated by commercial enterprises like banks and insurance companies, and that this huge market supported the research and development that rapidly advanced computer technology. 
A similar story could be repeated for most successful technologies. New technologies bring changes to many aspects of society, while at the same time social forces do much to stimulate and shape these technologies. To try to assign primacy to one or the other is to ignore a crucial feature of technological and social change. Both are dynamic processes characterized by the reciprocal interaction of a host of factors, some of them narrowly technical in nature, others not. No reasonable person could deny that technology has been a major force in making the world we live in, but it is important to always keep in mind that technology has not operated as an agent independent of the society in which it is imbedded. 
Social constructivism therefore offers the possibility for more human agency than technological determinism, but it is not likely that the ability to influence the course of technological change will be evenly distributed among the population as a whole. To the contrary, social constructivist analyses have often shown how differences in power and access to resources have shaped technological change. Particular technologies may be devised, selected, and disseminated because they serve the interests of a particular group, possibly in opposition to the interests of other groups. Technology confers power, but this power is not wielded over only the nonhuman universe. As C. S. Lewis has reminded us, “Man’s power over nature is really the power of some men over others with nature as their instrument.”

The development and application of technologies that are suited to our needs requires the informed participation of a wide range of people. Unfortunately, the very nature of modern technology places severe limits on popular understanding. The sophistication and complexity of contemporary technologies preclude direct involvement by all but those immediately concerned with them. The rest of us are passive consumers, content to reap the benefits of rationally derived knowledge but woefully ignorant of it. This creates the fundamental paradox of modern society: technology has generated massive powers available to human society, while as individuals we exert very little of that power. We have access to a wide range of powerful technologies, yet our inability to understand them often leaves us with feelings of impotence and frustration, as anyone who has experienced a computer crash will attest.
As has been noted, the application of rationality for the solution of human problems is both the consequence and the cause of optimism and a willingness to accept constant change. Yet one cannot help but wonder if these characteristics can be sustained in an environment that sharply limits participation and inculcates widespread feelings of having little or no power over the process of technological change. 
Strange notions can emerge when feelings of powerlessness are coupled with an extravagant faith in technology. The consequences of this combination are sometimes exhibited by fervent believers in alien spacecraft or UFOs (unidentified flying objects). Although convincing evidence of UFOs is lacking, a belief in their existence does not necessarily make one a crackpot. In some cases, however, a strident belief in the existence of UFOs takes on the characteristics of membership in a religious cult where the deities are superior beings who have produced an advanced technology. Alien space ships represent a level of technical sophistication not attained on Earth, and some UFO enthusiasts entertain the hope that the aliens that created them will take over this planet and solve its problems. Faith in a higher technology may be combined with a mistrust of the “establishment,” as a fair number of UFO adherents claim that their government is engaged in a massive conspiracy to prevent the general public from being aware of the existence of UFOs. There is no denying that on occasion governments lie to their citizens, but a cover-up of the required magnitude would be impossible for even the most well-organized government to pull off. Still, conspiracy theories strike a resonant chord with people who feel that they have been excluded from decision making, both political and technological. A quasi-religious belief in UFOs may therefore combine an excessive confidence in technology in general with a distrust of the people and organizations that control it in actual practice.
Distrust flourishes when people have no ability to participate in decisions that shape their lives, and the inability to affect the course of technological change can produce a mixture of naïve hope and paranoid reaction. A realistic sense of control, including a sense of having some control over technology, is essential for an individual’s mental health. No less important, widespread participation in the shaping of technology is essential for democracy. Technology’s benefits cannot be separated from its costs, and thus it becomes necessary to determine if the former justify the latter. If a society is truly democratic, such decisions will be made with as much citizen participation as possible. Moreover, the benefits and costs of technology are not shared equally, and once again the apportioning of costs and benefits should be done in as participatory a manner as possible. We will return to these themes in Chapter 17, but first we will take a closer look at how technology can affect people and groups in different ways.