What accounts for the emergence of particular technologies? Why do they appear when they do? What sort of forces generate them? How is the choice of technology exercised? To put it more concretely, why were digital computers developed only during the second half of the twentieth century even though their basic principles were understood more than a hundred years earlier? Why did photography undergo rapid development during the nineteenth century? What were the inventors of radio trying to accomplish, and how did their intentions differ from those of subsequent developers? These are some of the questions that this chapter will address as it considers some of the most basic issues in the study of technology.

Technological Change as a Social Process
As a starting point, it is important to keep in mind that technological change does not take place in a social vacuum. Technology is a human creation, and because humans are social creatures, technological change is necessarily a social process. In recent years, the study of technological change has been strongly influenced by a perspective known as “social constructivism,” which we looked at in Chapter 1.According to this approach, technological change does not occur because new devices and processes demonstrate their clear-cut superiority over other ways of doing things. For social constructivists, the analysis has to begin with the need to explain why certain technologies are assumed to work better than others. As Wiebe E. Bijker has noted, social constructivism is predicated on a belief in “the malleability of technology, the possibility for choice, the basic insight that things could have been otherwise.” To explain why things turned out the way they did, social constructivists describe how social structures and processes have affected choices of technologies. Since the presence of interest groups and unequal distributions of power are fundamental aspects of every society, social constructivists are particularly interested in delineating the main actors involved in the development and selection of particular technologies, and in noting how their actions reflect their positions in society. Accordingly, for scholarly practitioners of social constructivism, technological change is an inherently political process. New technologies do not succeed or fail solely on the basis of narrow technical merits. Rather, the achievement of technological “closure” (the point at which a particular technology is recognized as the accepted way of doing things, while others disappear or are marginalized) is closely tied to the presence of specific interest groups and their ability to affect the selection process.
Some form of social constructivism informs most contemporary studies of technological change, but considerable variation can be found in the relative emphasis put on social versus technical factors. Moreover, some students of technological change, most notably Thomas P. Hughes, have argued that the strength of the social constructivist approach may depend on the developmental stage of a particular technology. According to Hughes, social constructivism is most valid when a technology is at an early stage of development. Social, political, and economic forces are likely to exert the greatest influence when several alternative technologies emerge at about the same time. Conversely, once a technology has become well established, it becomes difficult to deviate from the path that has been laid out by technical requirements. For example, at the end of the nineteenth and beginning of the twentieth centuries, motorists could choose between cars with electric, steam, or internal combustion power plants. The triumph of the latter was not simply a matter of technical superiority, but was a reflection of the needs and expectations of the individuals who were the prime purchasers of automobiles. Once automobiles powered by internal combustion engines became well entrenched, the adoption of another type of automobile engine became extraordinarily difficult because the basic elements of our personal transportation infrastructure were firmly in place, everything from the fuel used to the skills necessary for effective repair work. Under these circumstances, technical requirements will prevail.

The Great Breakthrough
One benefit of the social constructivist approach is that it challenges the belief that technological change largely stems from the insights and labors of a few supremely talented individuals. Popular histories of technology have often looked to individual genius as the chief source of technological advance; we have all heard or read stories of how the inspired labors of Thomas Edison or the Wright brothers produced epochal inventions that transformed the world. Histories written from this point of view are in essence biographies of great inventors whose brilliance is assumed to be the sole source of technological advance. Other histories of technological advance have remained within this framework but have looked to a different kind of genius as the source of advance. The key players here are not the inventors of new technologies but rather the entrepreneurs who make inventions into commercial successes by taking risks, moving into uncharted territory, and in general doing what hadn’t been done before. There have been some individuals who have been both inventor and successful entrepreneur—for example, Edwin Land, the inventor and moving force behind the Polaroid camera—but they have been rare. Entrepreneurs generally take other people’s inventions and make them into commercial successes. From this perspective, the key figure in the development of the steel industry is not Henry Bessemer, the co-inventor of the iron-refining furnace that bears his name, but Andrew Carnegie, who laid the commercial and organizational foundations of the industry.
Arriving at a definitive determination of the relative importance of “great men and women” versus “social processes” in shaping the history of technology would require much more space than is available here. It can be noted, however, that an assessment of the relative contributions of the two has to take into account the fact that a great deal of technological change is the result of small, incremental changes. In contrast to the “heroic” approach to the history of technology, these involve the work of largely anonymous inventors, engineers, mechanics, and technicians. Although their individual contributions may seem modest, in aggregate they have been an extremely important source of technological advance.
These incremental changes often are the result of a learning process that occurs as a technology is used. Problems are identified and overcome, bugs are worked out, and improvements are made. In many cases, the cumulative results of these efforts are technological advances at least as important as those that stem from fundamental breakthroughs. In industries as different as petroleum refining and building construction, the major source of productivity improvements has been a multitude of small technological improvements that have resulted in large cumulative gains.
This process is nicely illustrated by Louis Hunter’s narrative of how the impressive development of nineteenth-century steamboats was the result of plodding progress in which invention in the formal sense counted far less than a multitude of minor improvements, adjustments and adaptations. The story of the evolution of steamboat machinery in the end resolves itself in a large part into such seemingly small matters as, for instance, machining a shaft to hundredths instead of sixteenths of an inch, or devising a cylinder packing which would increase the effective pressure a few pounds, or altering the design of a boiler so that cleaning could be accomplished in three hours instead of six and would be necessary only every other instead of every trip. Matters such as these do not get into the historical record, yet they are the stuff of which mechanical progress is made.
One can also witness the far-reaching consequences of numerous small improvements in the development of railroad technology. According to one calculation, if the traffic loads borne in 1910 had been carried by railroads employing the technologies of 1870, the additional costs would have amounted to$1.3 billion by the latter date. Fortunately, by 1910 American railroads had benefited from improvements in the size of cars and the power of locomotives, which in turn were the result of steady evolution. And so it goes today. Even though the railroad may be described as a “mature” industry, this pattern of incremental yet substantial technological development continues. American railroads have significantly lowered their costs through the implementation of a series of small improvements: better insulation for electrical components (thereby allowing higher power loads), improved turbochargers and fuel injection systems, higher compression ratios, more efficient motors in cooling radiators, two-speed cooling fans, redesigned air ducts, lower idling speeds, and the substitution of alternators for direct-current generators. By themselves, none of these innovations is terribly significant. But when they are all put together in a modern locomotive, the result is a 10 percent savings in fuel costs, and a gain of 24 percent in the ton-miles of freight carried per gallon of fuel consumed. When it is noted that railroads spend several billion dollars each year for fuel, the consequences of these improvements are all the more impressive.
In a world where the ability to produce successful technological innovations is increasingly a requirement for a firm’s success, if not its survival, each firm needs to tap every source of technological advance, no matter how modest it may seem. This is a point stressed by Anthony Athos and Richard Pascale in their book about American and Japanese management: “Careful scrutiny reveals that despite the exalted status of ‘strategy’ in the lexicon of American management, few great successes stem from one bold-stroke strategic thrust. More often, they result from one half-good idea that is improved upon incrementally. These improvements are invariably the result of a lot of ‘little people’ paying attention to the product, the customer, and the marketplace.”

The “D” in R&D
The process of making a technology work is often summarized by the abbreviation R&D, which stands for research and development. “Research” calls to mind images of cutting-edge work in well-equipped laboratories, where great breakthroughs produce dramatically new technologies. Research can be an exciting, even glamorous activity, and we naturally look to it as the basis of technological progress. It is the source of fundamental change in technology, like the invention of integrated circuits, cloning, and composite materials. Still, this sort of research rarely results in useable products. The realization of the potentialities created by research breakthroughs usually requires a lengthy process of development. Numerous problems have to be resolved, and, equally important, the new material or device has to be put into a form that allows it to be produced at a reasonable cost.
Here again we can see the importance of the slow, unspectacular improvements that turn a good idea into a working product or process. And here, too, we can often see a substantial outpouring of money. If basic research is an expensive process, development is often even more so. The development work that goes into preparing a new technology for actual production can entail massive expenditures for equipment, material, manpower, pilot plants, and the like.
A great deal of development work is oriented toward “scaling up”—that is, making the transition from a successful research result to large-scale production. It is one thing to invent a device or process that works under laboratory conditions, and quite another to produce it in an industrial setting where commercial success is the goal. The development of penicillin provides an excellent illustration of the many facets of the scaling-up process. Although the discovery of the bacteria-killing properties of penicillin initiated a major technological breakthrough, the development phase was certainly no less important. 
Penicillin, a fermentation product of the mold Penicillium notatum, was discovered in 1928 by Alexander Fleming, who observed that bacteria were destroyed in a culture that had been accidentally contaminated by the mold. Penicillium cultures grown in small quantities were the basis of laboratory and clinical research, but this process could not yield the large quantities of the drug needed for widespread therapeutic use. Large-scale production of penicillin was eventually done in huge fermentation vats, a process that required the solution of many technical problems. The key step was the development of a submerged fermentation process that allowed the mold to be grown directly in the nutrient medium. The success of this process in turn required a number of other improvements, such as new tank designs with special cooling systems and turbine mixers, which also had to be developed. The use of corn steep liquor (a by-product of corn starch production) as a culture medium increased yields tenfold, but it created a new problem. Penicillin requires air in order to grow, but severe foaming occurred when the culture was aerated. Anti-foaming products therefore had to be developed to alleviate this problem. The extraction of penicillin from the moldy brew in the vats also created problems that were ultimately solved by the use of freeze drying, which was itself scaled up from a process first used to preserve blood plasma. As a result of all of this development work, production of penicillin had reached 650 billion units by the end of World War II, and the cost of a dose was 55 cents instead of the $20 it had beenthree years earlier. 

All Together Now
The first chapter noted the importance of thinking of technologies as systems. This point is reinforced by a consideration of how particular technologies develop. Quite often, a technological leap forward takes place because of the availability of complementary technological developments that allow the resolution of fundamental problems. The history of the computer provides a good example of how complementary changes are essential for the translation of an idea into a workable technology. Back in the 1820s Charles Babbage began to develop an “analytical engine” that contained a set of input devices, a processor, a control unit, a memory storage, and an output mechanism—the essential elements of today’s computers. But Babbage’s computer was operated by an exceedingly complex set of gears, rods, and other mechanical linkages. Although he could draw on the talents of Ada Lovelace, who is often described as the world’s first computer programmer, Babbage’s ambitions were not fully realized for more than a century, when solid-state electronics, the cathode ray tube, and magnetic storage devices allowed the development of practical computers.
Another illustration of the importance of complementary technological changes can be drawn from the history of one of the twentieth century’s most important devices, the internal combustion engine. When these engines were first produced during the late nineteenth century, the spark that ignited the air–fuel mixture was timed to occur at the top of the compression stroke. This did not allow a sufficient time for the mixture to be completely ignited, and efficiency consequently suffered. When, after much experimentation, the spark was timed to occur before the piston reached the top of its stroke, the combustion process was greatly improved, and much more power was consequently delivered. Still, early engines were deficient in power because compression ratios were kept low in order to prevent the sudden detonation of the air–fuel mixture and resultant damage to the engine. This problem was solved in part by conducting careful inquiries into the combustion process and by reshaping the combustion chamber and piston crown in ways suggested by this research. But this was not enough. In order to employ higher compression ratios successfully, it was necessary to modify not just the engine but also the fuel it used. In particular, the research of Thomas Midgley and Charles Kettering demonstrated that the addition of tetraethyl lead to gasoline allowed higher compression ratios and a subsequent improvement in both power and economy. It was thus through a combination of cumulative improvements in both the engine and the fuel it burned that the internal combustion engine reached an acceptably high level of efficiency.
It is important to note that these changes in engine technology did not take place when the internal combustion engine was first invented, but rather during a period when it was already being sold to customers. This illustrates a point made by Nathan Rosenberg: “The idea that an invention reaches a stage of commercial profitability first and is then ‘introduced’ is, as a matter of fact, simple minded. It is during a (frequently protracted) shakedown period in its early introduction that it becomes obviously worthwhile to bother making the improvements.” In effect, consumers at times may be unwitting participants in the beta testing of new products.
The commercial viability of a new technology may thus stimulate the development of complementary technologies. A bottleneck that restricts the continued development of a particular technology creates strong economic incentives to find new technologies that clear the obstruction. Many obstacles are surmounted through the use of technologies that have been developed for use by a different industry or in a different sector. This can be seen today in the automobile industry, where emissions requirements have necessitated the use of microprocessors and computers for the regulation of spark advance and air-fuel ratios. Thus, a nineteenth-century technology, the four-stroke internal combustion engine, owes its survival to its marriage to a late twentieth-century technology.
Technological advance in one area is often stimulated by the emergence of new technologies in different, but related, areas. This process can be seen in the development of nineteenth-century metal-working industries. Although their products differed substantially, the processes employed by these industries were basically the same: turning, boring, drilling, milling, and planing. At the same time, they all confronted similar technical problems of transmitting power, reducing friction, and controlling the rate of feed. This meant that a technological solution arrived at by one industry was often directly applicable to the problems of another industry.This occurred in the early automobile industry, which made abundant use of the products and manufacturing techniques that had been developed by the bicycle industry during the 1880s and 1890s. Ball bearings, spoke wheels, drive chains, and the use of electrical resistance welding had been extensively employed for the manufacture of bicycles in the decades immediately preceding large-scale automobile production. One of the most novel and significant technologies entailed the use of stamped components to take the place of forgings. Their use eliminated a great deal of machining, with a consequent lowering of production costs. The cheap, mass-produced automobile thus owed much to technologies initially developed to make a product that it subsequently eclipsed.
This is hardly the only example of technologies developed by an established industry paving the way for a radically new one. Although the turbojet engine was a novel method of propulsion when it first appeared in the 1940s, it drew heavily on designs, components, and processes that had already been developed for steam turbines. In Edward Constant’s summary, “All the work done on blade design, gas flow, shaft and bearing loads, temperature distribution, lubrication systems, governors, blade-cutting machines, test procedures and instruments, and countless other facets of design and production could be applied to gas turbine development.”Interindustry transfers of technology do not happen automatically. The effective transfer of hardware, information, or simply (but importantly) the belief that a problem is solvable requires individuals and organizations that are capable of functioning in both worlds and have the incentives to do so. It also requires that these individuals and organizations are acceptable to the other individuals and organizations with which they interact, and that they are capable of speaking the same technical language. Technological innovation is, in Christopher Freeman’s phrase, a “coupling process” that occurs at the interfaces between science, technology, and the market. This does not take place solely through intuitive flashes: “It is a continuous creative dialogue over a long period of research, experimental design, and development.”
Finally, it should be noted that sometimes the complementary changes necessary for the success of a new technology are not technological. A successful technological change may require changes in basic habits and attitudes. This can be seen in the failure of agricultural extension agents in New Mexico to get farmers to adopt hybrid corn in the late 1940s. There was no question about the technical superiority of the corn: demonstrations showed that its use resulted in a potential trebling of yields. Impressed by this improvement, half of the farmers planted the new variety, thereby immediately doubling their output. But after two years virtually all of the farmers had abandoned hybrid corn and reverted to their traditional low-yielding crop. The problem was that the cornmeal made from the hybrid variety could not be made into good tortillas; it did not taste right and couldn’t be easily shaped. In the absence of a change in culinary patterns, a technically superior product could make no lasting impact.

Push and Pull
The rejection of hybrid corn in New Mexico demonstrates the perils in the technological determinist perspective, in which technological change is viewed as a largely self-contained process. As we have seen, social constructivists have taken issue with “internalist” histories that ignore the social, economic, and political forces that shape technological change. And as was noted a few pages ago, contemporary scholarship has moved away from the “great person” approach to the history of technology. To be sure, many technologies owe their existence to the inspiration and hard work of individuals, including the unsung heroes who were responsible for the myriad improvements necessary for the realization of a new technology. But surely more is involved than their efforts. After all, human ability is presumably spread evenly throughout cultures and historical epochs, yet significant technological changes are not equally distributed over time and place. Thomas Edison’s genius produced 1,093 patents, and some of his inventions transformed the world. Had he been born in ancient Rome or dynastic China, he might have helped to design aqueducts or sections of the Great Wall, but it is unlikely that his talents would have changed the course of Roman or Chinese history. Geniuses require appropriate social settings for the realization of their talents.
What kind of social system is required if inventive ability is to flourish? Why does technological innovation occur in some places and times and not in others? In beginning to answer these questions, it is helpful to apply to technological change the concepts that have been so useful to economists: supply and demand. Everything from fundamental scientific breakthroughs to minor refinements serves to “push” new technologies into the world. Still, simply having an available supply of new devices and techniques does not guarantee that they will be used. Many examples of technologies that languished because they were “ahead of their time” can be cited. The pneumatic tire was patented in 1845 and then forgotten until it was reinvented by John Dunlop in 1888. DDT was first synthesized in 1874, but it was not put to use as an insecticide until 1941. Several decades elapsed before the 
laser passed from being a laboratory curiosity to a practical device used for everything from supermarket scanners to instruments for microsurgery.
For a technology to make the transition from the potential to the actual requires not just that it exist; there must also be a desire for it, coupled with the ability to pay for it. Economists call this “effective demand.” Seen in this light, technology is like any other good or service; it will not be produced unless some person, group, or organization wants it and is willing to buy it. Technology is “pushed” by a variety of forces, but it also has to be “pulled” by effective demand. To understand why certain technologies have flourished while others have languished, it is therefore necessary to consider the configuration of a society and the way in which it determines the effective demand for particular technologies.
The most influential research on the importance of effective demand-inducing technological change was done by Jacob Schmookler. By examining a long series of patents in various industries, Schmookler found that their emergence was closely related to the level of demand for the products of these industries. To take one rather obvious example, inventors’ interest in improving the horseshoe was strong when the horse was a primary means of transportation, but interest evaporated when the steam engine and the internal combustion engine began to displace it.
Another illustration of the importance of demand-inducing technological development can be extracted from the history of photography in the nineteenth century. For centuries painters and scientists had made use of the camera obscura, a darkened room into which light was admitted through a pinhole, resulting in the projection of an inverted image of an outdoor scene on the opposite wall. Later developments substituted optical lenses for the pinhole, which made for a sharper image. Photographs were first produced during the 1820s and 1830s when pioneers such as Niepce, Daguerre, and Fox Talbot devised chemical emulsions that preserved the image on paper or a metal plate. But the rapid growth of photography cannot be attributed simply to the supply of these inventions. At this time, social changes were sweeping across Europe, resulting in the ascendance of a new social elite, the property-owning commercial and industrial bourgeoisie. The members of this group had a keen desire to flaunt their affluence by taking on characteristics of the old aristocracy. For the latter, a key artifact of their status was the painted portrait; we have all seen renditions of persons such as the Eighth Duke of Puddleswallop hanging in our local museums. But many of the rising bourgeoisie lacked the money or the time for such symbols of their importance, and, in any event, there were not enough skilled portrait painters to serve the needs of this growing group of people. Their aspirations were therefore met by the photographic portrait studio, where the subject posed with the trappings of upper-class status, such as rich draperies and elegant furniture. In the later decades of the century, new and cheaper methods of photography emerged to meet the demands of poorer yet increasingly affluent people, such as American immigrants who wanted portraits that could be sent back home. Today, the effective demand produced by a great mass of consumers has stimulated the development of a huge variety of photographic apparatus, ranging from simple disposables to ubiquitous cell phone cameras and sophisticateddigital cameras.
Good business practice is often implicitly based on the realization that successful technological development requires the presence of effective demand. One English study found that the key determinant of a firm’s innovative success was an understanding of customer requirements. This meant that from its very inception, a new product or process had to be developed with an eye toward meeting the needs of actual or potential customers. Similarly, a Canadian study found that the commercial failure of many inventions was due to an inability to evaluate the true extent of demand. A great deal of product development was done with little consideration of market potential. It was often the case that entrepreneurs were so infatuated with their product innovation that they were incapable of realistically assessing opportunities and the nature of the market.

Belated Demand
At the same time, however, gauging the potential demand for a new product can be a tricky task. Many of today’s “essential” technologies were not at first recognized as such. When in the late 1930s Chester Carlson attempted to interest established business machine manufacturers in his photocopying device—the first Xerox machine—they were of the uniform opinion that there was no point in employing complicated apparatus and chemicals simply to replace carbon paper. And even inventors can badly misjudge the ultimate consequences of their own creations. Alexander Graham Bell initially thought that the telephone he invented would primarily be used to transmit operas and other musical performances from the concert hall to the home. Edison at first believed that one of the main applications of his phonograph would be to record the last words of dying men. We can also take note of the judgment of Howard Aiken, the director of the team that built one of the world’s first computers, who in the early 1950s prophesied that in the foreseeable future, the total need for computers in the United States could be met by no more than a half-dozen machines. In a similar fashion, before 1950 Thomas J. Watson, the president of IBM, was of the opinion that there would be no commercial market for computers.
The history of the radio also shows how technology may be put to use not envisaged by its inventors. When equipment for sending and receiving radio waves was first developed during the late nineteenth century, no one imagined that it would be used for commercial broadcasts. The first transmitters and receivers were devised for purely intellectual purposes—in order to test the validity of James Clerk Maxwell’s theories about the nature of electromagnetic waves. Only after the passage of more than a decade did some visionaries perceive a commercial use for radio apparatus, and then their imaginations were limited to the use of the radio for ship-to-shore communications. Decades passed before the idea of broadcasting to a mass audience emerged.
What are we to make of these examples? They seem to refute the theory that technologies are primarily the result of “demand-pull,” for all of the technological developments just described emerged in the absence of apparent demand for them. Perhaps we can salvage the demand-pull theory by distinguishing two different kinds of technological advances. The first kind consists of refinements and improvements to an existing way of doing things, while the second (and far less frequent) is the truly revolutionary breakthrough—the Internet, the digital computer, radio, the telephone, and the like. In cases such as these, the very novelty of a revolutionary breakthrough makes it difficult to determine what its ultimate uses will be and who, if anyone, will want it. By contrast, advances of the first kind occur within a known context; the basic technology is already in use, and there are likely to be people and business firms that want and are willing to pay for, the new wrinkles that promise to improve existing technology. Improvements of this sort, therefore, have a predictable market. Conversely, radically new technologies confront a great deal of uncertainty. They may satisfy a latent need, or they may create a new one. They may also sink without leaving a trace. They are flights into the unknown, and it is hazardous to guess what sort of a reception they will meet. If nothing else, they confirm the old Chinese saying that it is dangerous to make predictions—especially about the future.

Market Economies and Technological Advance
The forces that “push” and “pull” technological advance do not exist everywhere or in equal measure. In many places and at many times, the distribution of wealth and power retarded these forces, resulting in a slow pace of technological advance. Moreover, the particular technological advances that do occur usually reflect a society’s general configuration of wealth and power. In the European Middle Ages, the landowning aristocracy and Church officials controlled most of the wealth and wielded great power. The monastic orders often played an important role in land clearing, farming, and the construction of mechanical devices, but for the most part the religious and secular establishment showed little interest in such matters. While the era gave rise to significant technological advances in water power, mechanical clocks, and weaponry, its most evident technological triumph was the great symbol of the traditional order: the Gothic cathedral.
As European history unfolded, the interests and demands of a growing merchant class led to the development of technologies that eventually surpassed even the soaring cathedrals. The great technological innovations that began in the midfifteenth century with improvements in shipbuilding and ocean navigation were closely associated with the rise of capitalism and the emergence of a market system. A market system organized around the principle of private property was of crucial importance for the stimulation and guidance of inventive and innovative abilities, as well as their application to production.
One of the strongest accolades to the technological dynamism of capitalist society can be found, of all places, in The Communist Manifesto. With unfeigned admiration, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels note that the following:
The bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years, has created more massive and colossal productive forces than have all preceding generations together. Subjection of Nature’s forces to man, machinery, application of chemistry to industry and agriculture, steam-navigation, railways, electric telegraphs, clearing of whole continents for cultivation, canalisation of rivers, whole populations conjured out of the ground—what earlier century had even a presentiment that such productive forces slumbered in the lap of social labour?
In the time of Marx and Engels, and in our own time, a market economy driven by the activities of self-interested businessmen has produced the most receptive environment for technological innovation. There are several reasons for this. A market economy will stimulate inventive efforts, for it promises financial rewards to those able to meet the needs of consumers. For example, somebody invents a better mousetrap in the hope of selling it in the market. If the demand is there, eager customers will buy it. Everybody is better off: consumers have a better mousetrap, while the inventor gets rich and retires to Palm Springs, and nobody worries about how technological advance has lowered the quality of life for mice. Second, a market economy is characterized by the presence of numerous competitors. Under these circumstances, a producer is strongly motivated to develop and apply new technologies in order to make better products and to reduce production costs. Failure to do so may result in the eventual collapse of the enterprise, as the history of many once-successful firms demonstrates. Finally, a market system is particularly effective in eliciting the production of the auxiliary items necessary for technological innovation. A new technology will require special materials, components, and services. Because of its responsiveness to new sources of demand, a market economy is well suited to meet these requirements.
The advantages of a market economy in stimulating technological advance are further demonstrated by an examination of centrally planned economies. For decades the economies of the Soviet Union and the People’s Republic of China were organized through the mechanisms of central planning, but during the 1980s it became painfully evident that these mechanisms were fatally flawed. One of the chief manifestations of that failure has been a retarded technology. It cannot be denied that the Soviet Union produced some impressive technological achievements, most notably in its space and military programs, while China made significant progress in industrializing an impoverished country, but taken as a whole their level of technological development remained stagnant while the United States, Western Europe, and Japan moved rapidly forward.
The backwardness of centrally planned economies has had significant political repercussions. In China, dissatisfaction with the pace of technological and economic advance led to a retreat from centralized planning and a much greater scope for market-based economic relations, In the Soviet Union, the fear of falling even further behind the West motivated the Gorbachev regime to introduce some elements of a market economy and to attenuate the role of central planning. But these efforts were not enough, and within a few years the Soviet Union ceased to exist. In the countries of the former Soviet Union and in China, it has become evident that market-based reforms have made major contributions to economic and technological development, albeit at the cost of greater economic and social inequality, as the recent histories of the two nations have shown.
Many of the difficulties experienced by centrally planned economies in achieving technological advance have been the result of a basic tension between their system of economic management and the requirements of technological innovation. Centrally planned economies rest on the assumption that economic activities can be reduced to predictable routines. But the course of technological innovation is notoriously difficult to predict. The bureaucratic procedures that work tolerably well for the administration of routine productive tasks usually fail when they are applied to technological innovation. A planning agency can set goals and quotas for the production of established goods, and various ministries can oversee the actual operation of individual enterprises through routine bureaucratic administration. But these procedures work much less well when innovation is the goal. Innovation is an activity full of risk and unpredictability, and it cannot easily be accommodated to preprogrammed structures and activities.
To make matters worse, centrally planned economies attempt to motivate workers and managers through the allocation of rewards that create disincentives for technological innovation. A factory manager typically receives bonuses for the fulfillment and overfulfillment of quotas for established products, as given by the central plan. The production of an innovative product is not rewarded, for it has not been stipulated by the plan. The uncertainties and unpredictabilities that surround technological innovations create risks for those who seek to develop and use them, but these risks are not matched by commensurate rewards for thosewho take them.

Noneconomic Sources of Technological Advance
It is not the intention here to convey the impression that only market forces can produce technological innovation; as we shall see, government institutions have become increasingly important sources of technological advance. And no inference should be made that the historical superiority of a market economy in promoting technological advance makes it a superior system in general. There is more to life than technological advance, and, as we have already seen and shall see some more, both capitalism and the market have produced technologies that have been detrimental to large numbers of people.
Furthermore, technological innovation cannot always be traced to economic motives or even to the desire to address practical problems. To be sure, we tend to think of technology as the result of efforts to solve problems of this sort; after all, technology has already been defined as the product of knowledge that is used in order to get something done. The very word “technology” conjures up images of useful devices, and technology’s practitioners—engineers, managers, and skilled workers—are often viewed as a serious bunch, sitting rigidly in front of computer terminals, making precise measurements, and, above all, applying their talents to the solution of practical problems that are usually tied to economic concerns.
In fact, even the most practical of inventions may owe their origins to a spirit that seems more closely connected to play than to “productive” work. When Willis Whitney served as the first director of the research laboratory of the General Electric Company, he often asked his scientists and technicians there if they were “having fun.” For Whitney, “fun” was working on problems that had stumped everyone. Pursuing these problems was nothing less than the most exciting thing that a person could do.
Consider, too, one of America’s most famous inventors, Benjamin Franklin. With typical American pragmatism he wrote, “Utility is in my opinion the test of value in matters of invention, and that a discovery which can be applied to no use, or is not good for something is good for nothing.” Franklin’s inquiries into the nature of electricity did result in one useful device: the lightning rod, which saved many a building from destruction. But his other inquiries had a less immediate payoff. Although Franklin devised a number of devices that helped him to learn more about the nature of electricity, decades passed before electricity had any practical value. Indeed, he was “chagrined a little that we have been hitherto able to produce nothing in this way of use to mankind.”
Later events proved him wrong, although he never shared in that knowledge. Still, the pursuit of useful innovations could not have been the prime motive for Franklin’s inquiries. Franklin was an amateur in the literal sense of the word: a person who pursues an activity for the sheer love of it. For many years the leisure-time pursuits of amateur scientists such as Franklin sustained research into the nature of electricity despite the absence of direct applications, yet these “idle” intellectual efforts were essential to the invention of a great variety of useful devices.
A century after Franklin died, a young man of seventeen climbed a cherry tree and turned his imagination to possibilities that only a few had dreamed of. The year was 1899, and the young man was Robert Goddard, who was to be the inventor of the liquid-fueled rocket. As he recalled in later years, “It was one of the quiet, colorful afternoons of sheer beauty which we have in October in New England, and as I looked toward the fields at the east, I imagined how wonderful it would be to make some device which had even the possibility of ascending to Mars, and how it would look on a small scale, if sent up from the meadow at my feet. . . . I was a different boy when I descended the tree from when I ascended, for existence at last seemed very purposive.” At that time, and for many years to come, Goddard could scarcely have imagined the products of that October vision: orbiting satellites for global communication links, weather prediction, global positioning systems, and the development of terrifying new weapons. Throughout his life Goddard continued to be energized by the dream of space travel for its own sake; practical consequences were at best a secondary concern.
It also should be noted that even in a predominantly market-oriented, capitalist society such as the United States, not all technologies have been generated and shaped by market forces. Chapter 18 will take up this issue by examining the role of the government in promoting technological change. At this point it will only be noted that technologies developed outside the constraints of the market system are less likely to be shaped by concerns about costs. Firms operating in a market environment know that minimizing costs is essential to success. Technologies that hold down production costs are quite appealing, as are technologies that expand sales by lowering the cost of the product itself. The Ford Motor Company during the glory years of the Model T is a striking example of a firm that owed its success to the use of new technologies in order to lower costs. This process also has been dramatically demonstrated in recent years as technological advances in the design and production of integrated circuits have led to sharp declines in the price of personal computers and a concomitant expansion of this market. At the same time, however, there are large sectors of the economy where prices and the costs of production are secondary concerns. As a result, the pattern of technological development can be quite different. This has been particularly evident in the defense industry, where the presumed dictates of national security have allowed the deployment of staggeringly expensive military technologies. To take a particularly striking example, a single Air Force F-22 fighter costs U.S. taxpayers $412 million (when R&D and testing costs are taken into account) and requires 30 hours of maintenance and an expenditure of $44,000 for every hour it is in the air. In a climate where only the presumed best will do, there are strong tendencies to “gold plate” weapons systems and to have little concern for cost constraints.
This tendency is not confined to the military sector. In recent years there has been a mounting concern about the financial costs of modern medical technologies. Some medical technologies, such as antibiotics, have undoubtedly lowered the costs of medical care, but many others have had the opposite result. When faced with a choice between controlling medical expenses or saving lives and alleviating pain through the use of sophisticated technologies, it is difficult for any individual or society concerned with the well-being of its members to put the former ahead of the latter. It is thus no surprise that about half the growth of health care spending that occurred during the second half of the twentieth century can be attributed to the use of new technologies.
The case of military and medical technologies brings us back to the necessity to consider the political and social context of technological choice. Economic considerations, important as they are, are not the sole basis of decisions regarding the development, selection, and use of particular technologies. Nor does technology develop according to its own internal dynamics. Technologies are social creations, and any successful attempt at understanding why particular technologies are created, chosen, and used must take into account their social context. Having made this basic point, we will pursue the matter a bit further by looking at the processes through which technologies spread and take hold. But before we do so, we need to consider one more source of technological change: scientific advance. This will be the topic of the next chapter.