Organizations are a dominant part of modern life. Most of us are born in organizations, are educated in them, spend our working lives in them, and, when we finally depart from this world, one organization takes care of our mortal remains while another attempts to ease our passage into the hereafter. The pervasive influence of organizations has stimulated a considerable amount of research on their relationship to technological change. We will first consider how organizations are affected by technology. After that, we will turn things around and look at how organizational structures and processes can influence the course of technological change.

Technology as a Cause of Organizational Structure
Much of the research on the interaction between organizations and technology has been concerned with the influence of technology on organizational structures and processes. Many of these studies have come to the conclusion that an organization’s structure—the extent to which authority is centralized, the amount of worker specialization, and the number and importance of formal rules—is strongly influenced by the principal technology that the organization uses.
“Organizational structure” is an abstract term that may seem remote from actual working lives. In fact, organizational structures can be of supreme importance; some promote workplaces that are challenging, involving, and sources of satisfaction, while work performed under different structural conditions is “just a job” that provides a paycheck and little else. The same can be said about the kinds of technologies found in different work environments. Some workplace technologies have the potential to empower workers and make their work a meaningful activity, while other technologies have the opposite effect.
Quite a lot of research on the relationship between technologies and organizational structures was conducted in the 1960s and 1970s, considerably more than in recent years. One such study was conducted by Robert Blauner. His research focused on a number of different industries that exemplified particular types of technologies and how these affected organizations and their employees. His examples were drawn from the industrial sector at a time when making things constituted a larger part of the economy than it does today. Nevertheless, his research has provided some useful ways of considering the relationship between production technologies and organizational patterns. His first example, printing, was characterized by a set of activities reminiscent of traditional craft occupations that required a high degree of worker skill and involvement. Conducting his research at a time before the invention of computerized typesetting equipment, Blauner found that the absence of specialized machinery resulted in a work environment that allowed a great deal of worker autonomy. In contrast, textile mill operatives were little more than machine-minders. Their activities had to be closely attuned to the demands of the equipment, so there was little room for individual initiative. The third industry studied was the automobile industry, which used assembly-line operations that forced the worker to submit to a rigid scheduling of activities that was dictated by the inexorable movement of the line. Finally, and in sharp contrast, continuous process industries, such as chemical manufacture or oil refining, made use of highly sophisticated technologies, but unlike textile production or automobile manufacture, they required considerable worker involvement and initiative. Workers had to carefully monitor production processes and take decisive action when the inevitable problems occurred. Their work could not be precisely scheduled or regulated, and they enjoyed a considerable amount of on-the-job freedom.
Whereas Blauner’s study focused on the relationship between the technology used by an industry and its effects on workers, Joan Woodward’s inquiries centered on how different technologies affected organizational structures per se. Of particular concern to her were such structural variables as the number of levels in the managerial hierarchy, the ratio of managers to other personnel, the number of people supervised by first-line managers, and the flexibility of the managerial system. Woodward was not concerned with individual technologies, but with general manufacturing processes. Her mode of analysis made use of three broad categories: unit and small-batch production (such as shipbuilding or the manufacture of large transformers), large-batch and mass production (as exemplified by automobile manufacture), and process production (such as the production of chemical or petroleum products). 
According to Woodward, each of these categories was distinguished by differences in technological complexity and the extent to which uncertainty could be reduced through the application of routine procedures. These differences, in turn, resulted in different types of organizational structures, each with their distinctive processes. Mass-production technologies required routinized processes, narrowly defined job duties, and a clear hierarchy of authority that kept a firm grip on things. In contrast, the two other methods of production—unit production and continuous process production—were much less rigid in their operations and had a regular flow of worker–management communication that was not filtered according to hierarchical position. In similar fashion, the span of control—the number of workers under a single supervisor—was greatest in firms using mass-production technologies. Other kinds of organizational differences also seemed to reflect production technologies. Managerial specialization occurred more frequently in mass-production firms, and process production technologies required a higher ratio of managers to other personnel than was the case in organizations using different productive technologies. More relationships could be cited, but Woodward’s essential point is that organizational forms must be matched to production technologies. In practical terms, an effective organization is one that uses structures and procedures that are appropriate to the productive technology employed. 
Another example of an organizational theory guided by a consideration of technology has been provided by the work of Charles Perrow. Perrow’s theory is pitched at a more general level than that of Blauner or Woodward. Instead of considering specific types of production technologies, Perrow considers two basic aspects of the work undertaken within an organization: the degree of variability of the raw materials processed by the organization, and the extent to which problem-solving procedures can be routinized. By raw materials, Perrow does not mean just inanimate objects; iron ore is a basic raw material for a steel mill, but for an employment agency, people are its major raw material. In “processing” its raw materials, an organization will confront different degrees of difficulty. Perrow’s analysis of the problem-solving process centers on the number of exceptional cases that must be confronted and the extent to which the problem-solving procedures are “analyz-able”—that is, the extent to which they can be reduced to a routine. Different kinds of organizations are characterized by different combinations of these elements:
    Few exceptions and analyzable problem-solving procedures, as exemplified by:
    * mass-production manufacture
    * custodial mental institutions 
    * prisons 
    Few exceptions and unanalyzable procedures, as exemplified by:
    * craft manufacture
    * custom-made products
    * most schools 
    Many exceptions and analyzable procedures, as exemplified by:
    * engineering 
    * heavy machinery manufacture
    * a large portion of medical practice
    Many exceptions and unanalyzable procedures, as exemplified by:
    * cutting-edge scientific research, 
    * much of the aerospace industry
    * painting, sculpture, and other fine arts
Perrow’s implicit definition of technology is quite general and abstract. Technology is simply defined as a way of doing things, and no attention is paid to the material artifacts that are part of these technologies. What is important is the nature of the raw material and methods needed to convert it into the organization’s products. Above all, Perrow is concerned with organizational effectiveness. A major conclusion of his analysis is that the organizational structure should reflect the particular qualities of the raw materials being used and the technology used for their transformation. To be effective, an organization must use technologies appropriate to its tasks. His conclusions are thus similar to Woodward’s: there is no such thing as an optimal organizational form that is universally valid. Everything depends on how things are produced and the materials from which they are made. 
These studies, and others like them, have sensitized organizational theorists to the influence of technology on organizational structures and processes, albeit at the risk of drifting toward technological determinism. Yet at the same time, few hard-and-fast conclusions can be asserted. Some empirical studies have found no relationship between an organization’s technology and its structure, but taken as a whole, research into organizations has shown that their structures and processes are influenced by the technologies that they use, although the relationship is not particularly strong.
The lack of a definitive relationship between technology and organizational structure is understandable, given the complexity of most organizations. Rather than making use of a single technology, organizations employ a variety of technologies, especially when they have numerous functional divisions. An R&D laboratory and an accounting office may be components of the same organization, but their technologies will differ substantially. Accordingly, the linkage between technology and organizational structure is likely to be more evident when the basic element of analysis is the work unit rather than the organization as a whole. Even here, the relationship is not likely to be an exact one, as the size of the organization and its components have also been shown to strongly affect organizational structure, no matter what technologies are employed. 
What does seem clear, however, is that a crucial variable connecting technology and organizational structure is the degree to which an organization’s operations consist of routine activities. What is meant by “routine” in this context is the kind of activities that can be done by following standardized procedures. The job of a cook in a fast-food restaurant is mostly a matter of cooking a few items according to a preset timer and doling out portions of ketchup from a dispenser that always supplies the same quantity. Contrast this with the work of a chef in a high-end restaurant, who uses a variety of cooking techniques, develops new dishes, and makes use of seasonally available fruits and vegetables. Technologies that reduce work to preset routines are a good fit with formalized organizational structures and their well-articulated rules, clearly defined responsibilities, and fixed lines of authority.
Although the technologies they use influence the way that organizations are structured, this is not the end of the story. Organizational structures are created by individual men and women, and as such they reflect the cultural traits that these individuals bring to the organization. These, in turn, will affect the relationship between technology and organizational structure. One study of manufacturing plants in Britain, France, and Germany found that the relationship between technology and organizational structure found by Woodward did not hold when a cross-national analysis was undertaken. No matter what the level of technological complexity, German firms had higher levels of worker expertise, autonomy, and flexibility than French firms, while British firms were in an intermediate position. In similar fashion, a study of American and Japanese factories found that there was less specialization and taller hierarchies in the Japanese firms even when the technologies used were substantially identical to the ones employed in the American factories.
The influence of national cultures on organizational structures and processes illustrates an enduring problem in ascertaining the relationship between technology and organizational structure. Although many questions remain unanswered regarding this relationship, the studies that have been conducted have led to a significant rethinking of the nature of organizations and their management. As the idea took hold that an organization’s structure was influenced by the technology it employed, it became apparent that one of the cherished notions of management, that there is “one best way” to organize things, is incorrect. As has been noted above, what works with one production technology will not necessarily work with another. In order to be successful, an organization needs to develop and use organizational structures and processes that are appropriate for the technologies it employs. As a result, many different kinds of organizational structures have been developed and used—matrix organizations, “ad-hocracies,” task forces, project teams, loose aggregations of professionals, and “skunk works.” And all the while, plain old bureaucratic organization is alive and well in places where it is still appropriate (and sometimes where it is not).

Technology as a Consequence of Organizational Structure
Up to now we have considered how technology affects organizations. Yet the reverse can also be true. Organizations can shape technological change through their ability to affect the supply and demand for a particular technology. We are a long way from Adam Smith’s perfect market, where no individual firm is able to significantly influence the supply of a product or the demand for it. In regard to supply, an organization that accounts for a significant portion of an industry can strongly influence the technological development of the industry as a whole when it creates (or refrains from creating) new products. The choices of a few firms thus determine the kinds of cars we drive, the way steel is made, the operating systems used by our computers, and the links we get when we do a Google search. In similar fashion, when a few organizations are the major purchasers of particular products (as when a few aerospace firms buy highly specialized machine tools), their requirements will determine the nature of the product and the technology it embodies.
On what basis do organizations make technological choices? This is an important question, given the importance of organizational decisions for the course of technological change. Unfortunately, researchers have not paid much attention to this issue. Most of the studies centering on the connection between technology and organizational structures and processes simply take technology as a given. In the studies just summarized, the technologies used by organizations appeared as independent entities. These studies tacitly imply that organizations and their personnel react passively to the presumed dictates of technology, and in so doing they fall prey to technological determinism.
It is possible, however, that the technologies employed by an organization are themselves the product of the organization’s own structure and processes, and, in particular, the configurations of power within the organization. Such a view would be in general accord with the perspective presented earlier in this book that technologies can be, and often are, employed by individuals or groups in order to advance their own interests. Charles Perrow, whose ideas were described a few pages ago, has recognized this, and in so doing has expressed some disenchantment with his earlier work in which he took technology to be an independent influence on an organization’s structure. Perrow forcefully makes the point that, after all is said and done, organizations are powerful tools for achieving goals. Much therefore depends on who controls the tools, and for what purposes. A technology might be selected not because of its innate superiority but because it meets the needs of the power holders within that organization.
One example of this process can be found in the early history of electrical power in the United States. Until 1915 the most common sources of electrical power were small-scale generating plants that had been set up to serve individual homes, apartment buildings, or business enterprises. In the years that followed, these facilities went into decline as large generating stations serving a wide area came to be the dominant mode of generating electrical power. Some of the success of these stations can be attributed to more efficient operation through economies of scale, but more was involved than the pursuit of efficiency. Of considerable importance to the shaping of the American electrical power industry were two industry-wide organizations, the National Electric Light Association (NELA) and the Association of Edison Illuminating Companies (AEIC). These organizations were, in turn, strongly influenced by a few men who had close personal and organizational ties to Samuel Insull, the entrepreneur who played the leading role in the construction and operation of large-scale urban generating plants. Insull’s associates used their strategic position within NELA and AEIC to determine the kinds of topics discussed at meetings of the two associations and the papers they published, and to take the lead in prescribing the equipment and procedures deemed best for the industry. Most importantly, the group was able to strongly influence the drafting of government regulations that worked to the advantage of privately owned, centralized generating plants, and to the detriment of local, small-scale facilities. In sum, the basic technological configuration of electricity generation was not solely the result of technical and economic requirements, but it also reflected the use of organizational power to advance the interests of particular individuals and firms. 
Another noteworthy example of the choice of technology being affected bythe exercise of power in an organizational setting is provided by David Noble’s study of the development of numerically controlled machine tools. During the early 1950s the Servomechanism Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, with the financial support of the U.S. Air Force, produced the first numerically controlled (NC) machine tools. Instead of being manipulated by skilled machinists, these devices were guided by programs stored on magnetic tape. NC technology increased productivity and allowed the precise machining of the complex shapes used in modern aircraft. At the same time, NC machine tools significantly reduced the amount of skilled labor required and removed a great deal of decision-making power from the machinists. These consequences could be taken as an unavoidable by-product of technological advance; that is, the technology determined the skills, work patterns, and hierarchical relationships found in a machine shop using NC machine tools. 
The actual story is quite a bit more complicated. Most importantly, the use of numerical control was not the only way to make machine tools run automatically. During the late 1940s, a “record-playback” method for machine-tool guidance was developed. This technology recorded the motions of a machinist making a part. These motions were recorded on magnetic tape, which was then used to run the machine tool. The machinist, and not a programmer removed from the workplace, was thus the source of the machine’s instructions. As it turned out, this was the greatest drawback of this technology. Numerical control was far more appealing to managers because it allowed them to gain more control over the work process. NC tools promised a reduction of the decision-making powers of workers and vested it with managers, engineers, and programmers. In the words of one manager: “Look, with record-playback the control of the machine rests with the machinist—control of feeds, speeds, number of cuts, output; with NC there is a shift of control to management. Management is no longer dependent upon the operator and can thus optimize the use of their machines. With NC, control over the process is placed firmly in the hands of management—and why shouldn’t we have it?”
As things turned out, NC did not completely fulfill management’s hopes for greater control. As we have seen in Chapter 10, computer-controlled production systems have their drawbacks, and the fully automated factory is still a long way off, even with today’s generation of computer numerical control (CNC) machines. Although machinists face only fair future employment prospects, their services are still needed; a worker lacking the necessary skills can do tens of thousands of dollars of damage in a few seconds. In today’s industries, machinists with high levels of skill and a fair amount of autonomy continue to be essential.
The relationship between technology, worker skills, and organizational authority has become especially salient as a result of the incorporation of computers and automated systems into production processes. Modern information systems can be used to enhance the power and responsibilities of shop floor workers. At the same time, however, they can produce the opposite effect by giving management a greater capacity to centralize operations and restrict the discretion of the workers. As one manager asserted, “The more we can control with the computer, the less dependence we will have on operators with in-depth knowledge. When there is a problem, we will have computer programs, logic, electronic sensors. We will be able to understand the problems.”
A certain degree of computer-based centralization may be justified in terms of its supposed contribution to coordination and efficiency. But this is hardly its only rationale. Many managers worry that computerized information systems can just as easily dilute managerial authority by making information more readily available to ordinary workers. A top executive from the same firm as the manager quoted above described the potential erosion of managerial authority:
The classic managerial role has been that of the handler, manipulator, dealer, and withholder of information. An issue that the technology is forcing us to face involves the loss of managerial control. . . . Suddenly you are vesting in folks at the control station, folks who are interfacing with a tremendous technology power—power to see all the functions of the operation. That is kind of scary to some managers.
Managers realize that the control of information has been an essential element of their authority. Consequently, in the words of one line manager, “Managers perceive workers who have information as a threat. They are afraid of not being the ‘expert.’ They are used to having everyone come to them and ask what to do.” This use of information was duly noted by a worker in the same firm: “[Managers] can’t share information with us, because only by holding on to knowledge that we don’t have can they maintain their superiority and their ability to order us around.” 
In this setting, computer-based information systems are not neutral instruments; rather, they are likely to be used in ways that are congenial to those occupying positions of authority within organizations. As with NC machine tools, a technology may be employed because managers see it as a way of extending their own power. Conversely, computerized information systems may be used to empower workers, enhance their responsibilities, and give them a claim to higher wages. There is no simple technological logic governing the use of these systems. The use of an existing technology may reflect the existing distribution of power in an organization, while the installation of a new technology may become an occasion for conflict over how it will be wielded in the future.

Organizations and New Information Technologies
Some of the issues surrounding the relationship between technological change and the evolution of organizational structures appear in sharper focus when we take a look at digital information technologies. Numerous scholars have pointed out that the essential work of organizations centers on the manipulation of information, broadly construed. Whether it is within an employment office, a bank, or a school, members of an organization spend a great deal of their time gathering information, analyzing it, deciding what to do in the light of what they have learned, communicating with others, and evaluating and reporting what has been done. 
During the second half of the nineteenth century, organizations were able to expand, improve their operations, and operate at higher levels of efficiency and effectiveness through the use of what were then novel technologies for gathering, recording, analyzing, distributing, and storing information—typewriters, telegraphs, dictating machines, telephones, pneumatic tubes, standardized forms, carbon paper, and filing systems. Recent decades have seen more revolutionary changes in information technology, and few of today’s organizations can get along without computers, database management programs, word processing, spreadsheets, fax machines, the Internet, e-mail, photocopy machines, and voice mail, while growing numbers of organizations are making extensive use of more recently introduced technologies like smartphones, intranets for internal communications, and videoconferencing for linking participants from all over the globe in real time.
The nearly universal use of electronic information technologies has motivated a substantial number of researchers to conduct inquiries into how these technologies have affected the structure and functioning of contemporary organizations. In general, this research has indicated that advanced information technologies have speeded up operations, reduced costs, increased the amount and accessibility of information, and more extensively linked members of organizations. Less certain, however, are the effects of new information technologies on organizational structures and procedures. As with all significant technological advances, there is rarely a simple, straightforward connection between technological and organizational changes. A new information technology, no matter how radical, is only one of many influences on a particular organization, and not necessarily the most important one; other organizational features, such as size, the composition of the work force, and the nature of the clientele may be more significant than the information technologies in use.
One much-discussed issue has to do with the role of new information technologies in promoting organizational decentralization. As some students of organizations have argued, a primary reason for the concentration of organizational authority in times past was the difficulty of obtaining and analyzing information. Information was a scarce resource, something that could be provided for only a few members of an organization, those at the top of the managerial pyramid. In similar fashion, only those at the summit of the organization were deemed capable of intelligently acting on the information made available to them. In contrast, today’s digital technologies make information and the ability to analyze it readily available at low cost, allowing more decentralized and participatory modes of decision making. This does seem to be happening; one study of 400 large firms found that greater levels of information technology were in fact associated with more delegation of authority to individuals and teams.
The easy availability of information makes it possible to decentralize organizational authority and to empower workers, but as has been noted before, the way that a technology is used is not entirely determined by the technology itself. Whether a powerful information technology promotes centralization or decentralization may have more to do with existing distributions of power and authority than with presumed technological imperatives. Instead of democratizing the workplace, today’s information technologies may be used to enhance managerial control. As we have seen in Chapter 11, some new workplace technologies, far from empowering workers, may enhance top-down control through the use of electronic monitoring.To take another example, it has sometimes been stated that the use of e-mail has eroded organizational hierarchies by allowing direct communications between the upper and lower ranks. This may come to pass when the top organizational echelons value and encourage bottom-up communications, but many managers would prefer to avoid such “distractions.” Again, a great deal depends on what the members of the organization, especially the managerial cadre, want to do with new communications technologies. The variability of managerial response to electronic communications probably is one of the main reasons that attempts to link the use of e-mail with organizational decentralization have not produced conclusive results.
As a final point, it should be kept in mind that new communications technologies do not necessarily supplant existing ones. For example, it might be expected that the growing use of the telephone in the early twentieth century reduced the need for traditional forms of communication, but in fact the opposite occurred, as telephone use seems to have stimulated the desire for more face-to-face communication, not less. The same thing may be happening today. New electronic media such as e-mail and videoconferencing certainly have their place, but they fail to provide some crucial elements of communication, such as body language and indications of whose turn it is to speak. Old-fashioned, face-to-face communication may not be of much importance for many organizational tasks, but it is usually essential for activities that have an important social-psychological component, such as negotiating, maintaining relationships, and building trust.


Interorganizational Relations and Technological Development 
No business firm, no matter how large, develops all of the technologies that are embodied in its products. Every firm depends on a network of suppliers for the new materials, components, and even the ideas that are incorporated into its own products. This is especially true of mature industries, where supplier firms are likely to be the principal source of substantial technological breakthroughs. Without the efforts of outside suppliers to develop and sell innovative products, it is likely that the technological level of many established industries’ products would stagnate. Technological changes are therefore shaped not only by the structure and dynamics of individual organizations but also by the pattern of relationships between organizations.
The automobile industry exemplifies the transfer of technology from supplier organizations to the automobile manufacturers themselves. It also demonstrates that interorganizational relationships may act as obstacles to technological advance within the industry. From its earliest years, the automobile industry has depended on thousands of outside suppliers for many of its components—everything from nuts and bolts to complete engines. These suppliers have provided some of the most important technological innovations for the automobile: disc brakes, radial tires, fuel injection, and electronic ignition, to name but a few. These innovations did not sell themselves, however. Before they appeared in automobiles, they had to be bought by the automobile manufacturers (also known as “OEMs,” or original equipment manufacturers).
Throughout most of the history of the industry, the relationship between suppliers and OEMs was that of independent buyers and sellers; cooperative approaches were generally absent. Suppliers were often left in the dark about the actual application of their products; a supplier might not even know which cars used its products or that they were about to be replaced by something totally different. The OEMs did not inform their suppliers about long-range intentions, and as a result suppliers could not effectively plan for the future. Research done by suppliers usually took place without direct consultation with the OEMs, and the job of application came only after the component had been developed. There were few attempts to foster joint efforts between OEM and supplier in order to devise and develop new technologies.
The lack of supplier involvement in the design process was a major reason why in the 1970s and 1980s American automobiles fared poorly in competition with those made in Japan, where there was a greater inclination to incorporate suppliers in the design process at an early stage of a car’s development. However, faced with stringent competition from automakers in Japan and other countries, in recent years American car manufacturers have begun to initiate joint activities with their suppliers. This is a logical and necessary step for an industry that needs to constantly upgrade the technological level of its products.
These cooperative activities stand in sharp contrast to traditional buyer–seller relationships, where both parties are only concerned with their own narrow interests. These relationships work well enough when standard commodities are bought and sold, and price is the paramount concern of the parties to the transaction. In contrast, the development and transfer of new technologies involve unique products and are fraught with many uncertainties. These uncertainties make it difficult to evaluate transactions on a precise cost–benefit basis. Moreover, marketplace exchanges by their nature do not foster the long-term vision necessary for the development and application of modern, sophisticated technologies. As the Japanese experience has indicated, the creation of effective working relationships between separate organizations is an essential element of technological and economic vitality.

Organizations and Technological Innovation
Technological innovation requires the commitment of personnel, money, and equipment if it is to be successful. It therefore seems logical to expect that large organizations, which are well endowed with these resources, should be the prime sources of technological changes. This expectation has been clearly articulated by John Kenneth Galbraith: “A benign Providence . . . has made the modern industry of a few large firms an excellent instrument for inducing technical change. It is admirably equipped for financing technical development. Its organization provides strong incentives for undertaking development and for putting it to use.” For Galbraith and others who hold to this view, the day has long passed when independent inventors and small firms were the prime source of important new technologies. Their place has been taken by the well-financed laboratories and workshops of large corporations and government agencies.
On the face of it, this seems reasonable. It is hard to imagine how jumbo jets and mainframe computers could be produced in basement workshops. But the large-scale production of an innovation is not the same thing as its original conception and creation. In point of fact, many important inventions were first conceived and produced by small firms. Only when their technical feasibility had been demonstrated did they become products of large enterprises. Key patents on the turbojet were held by Frank Whittle, an Englishman who produced some of the world’s first jet engines in a small workshop that was chronically short of funds and personnel. The first digital computer, the ENIAC, was put together at the University of Pennsylvania’s Moore School of Electrical Engineering by John Mauchly and J. Presper Eckert with the assistance of ten engineers. These are not exceptional cases. University research teams, private inventors, and small firms have made crucial contributions to technological advance. 
Efforts to determine with some precision the connection between organizational size and inventive activity have had mixed results. The assertion that large organizations play a preeminent role in the process of technological advance has not been supported, but neither has it been completely repudiated. Attempts to find a simple correlation (either positive or negative) between firm size and inventive activity are doomed to failure because factors other than size have to be taken into account. Of at least equal importance is the perceived developmental potential of the technologies relevant to an industry’s products and operations. It can be reasonably asserted that R&D efforts will be extensive in industries where key technologies are judged to have high potential for further development, and less so when technological prospects appear to be limited. Firms in traditional industries like food and primary metals typically devote only 0.4 percent of their sales revenues to R&D, while firms in the pharmaceutical industry may spend 16 to 20 percent of their revenues on R&D.
Even if a correlation between size and inventive activity existed, it would tell us nothing about how effective the research efforts of large firms have been. In fact, it is likely that small firms do a better job of producing new technologies relative to the cost of their research expenditures. Moreover, much of the research conducted by large organizations with secure markets is not oriented toward the production of radically new things but is directed at the creation of modest improvements.Much of it is simply defensive and imitative. Large firms that control a substantial share of their market are more likely to produce inventions that maintain the status quo and to avoid engaging in research that might radically alter the industry in which they already have a comfortable niche. Conversely, small firms or independent units of larger firms have been more successful in creating, developing, and marketing inventions that disrupt the technological status quo.
To be sure, invention is not the same thing as innovation. To actually bring an invention successfully into the marketplace may require the resources of a large organization. As we have already seen, the development of new technologies can be a lengthy and expensive process. Large organizations are often better equipped to do development work, where scaling up and making relatively small but nonetheless crucial improvements are the key tasks. This may be their most important contribution to technological innovation. Even so, gigantic size does not appear to be necessary or even beneficial. Large size may be necessary to muster the resources necessary for effective development work, but past a threshold size there appear to be no advantages to bigness.
These generalizations of course do not apply to all industries. In some industries such as nuclear power, the bulk of both the research and development work has been done by large firms and government agencies. In other industries, such as smartphone and tablet apps, a great amount of innovative effort has come from individuals and small firms. About the safest statement that can be made is that technological advance requires the efforts of a wide variety of organizational types and sizes. The initiation and development of some technologies require the massive efforts that only large organizations can provide. At the same time, many technologies have been—and will continue to be—the result of the efforts of people working in small organizations or just by themselves.

Entrepreneurs and Organizations
Organizations are essential for the operation of established technological systems like airlines or an oil refineries. Their fundamental purpose is to coordinate the efforts of individuals in order to accomplish essential tasks. When routine tasks are involved, this coordination is usually accomplished through the application of basic bureaucratic principles: specialization, formalization (the use of rules, regulations, and standard operating procedures), and hierarchical authority. Although bureaucracies are sometimes thought to be inherently inefficient, there is no reason that they should be. In fact, when it works as it should, a bureaucracy is like a well-oiled machine that faithfully does the job for which it was intended. 
But bureaucratic organization has its limitations. As has been noted above, bureaucracies thrive on routine, working best in stable environments where nothing new comes along to disturb their machinelike operations. At the same time, however, these bureaucratic routines are difficult or impossible to reconcile with the inherent uncertainty of creating something new. Furthermore, many unresolved issues surround not just the technology itself but also all of the ancillary changes that may be required to use it effectively. All sorts of uncertainties may be involved in such matters as the acceptance of the technology by customers, the retraining of personnel, legal liabilities, performance of component suppliers, and changing government regulations.
Bureaucracies rely on rules, regulations, and formal methods of management to get their employees to do what needs to be done. In most cases, activities and projects are closely scheduled and subject to careful financial scrutiny. But innovators usually need a lot of elbow room and have an indefinite time horizon, which puts them at odds with bureaucratic procedures. A large corporation that is organized according to bureaucratic principles can be a difficult environment for inventors. As Jack Kilby, the co-inventor of the integrated circuit, has noted: “There is a basic incompatibility of the inventor and the large corporation. Large companies have well-developed planning mechanisms which need to know at the beginning of a new project how much it will cost, how long it will take, and above all what it’s going to do. None of these answers may be apparent to the inventor.”
As we have seen in Chapter 3, technological innovation is often the work of entrepreneurs. By definition, entrepreneurs are people who disrupt normal activities and procedures by vigorously pushing new ways of doing things. Promoting innovation is risky business, and routine-seeking bureaucratic organizations are generally disinclined to take risks. Not only is a bureaucracy’s structure attuned to routine activities, its personnel usually seek to protect their positions and maintain their customary way of life. Under these circumstances, an entrepreneur’s efforts to promote innovation within an organization may encounter a fair amount of resistance and even hostility.
Although entrepreneurial activities are usually associated with the private sector, entrepreneurship may emerge as a force for change in government agencies, charitable organizations, schools, and religious institutions. The transformative power of an entrepreneur in the face of stiff opposition is well illustrated by an episode in the history of one of the most hidebound institutions in nineteenth-century America, the U.S. Navy. At that time, gunnery was highly inaccurate; of the 9,500 shots fired from American naval vessels during the Spanish–American War, only 121 found their target. No attempt was made to follow a target; gunners used their cannons’ elevating gear to give the shell the proper trajectory, fired after the roll of the ship brought the target into their sights, and hoped for the best. Then, during the last years of the nineteenth century, a British naval officer modified the elevating gear of his ship’s guns so that they could be rapidly moved, allowing them to continuously track their target. He also modified the gun’s telescopic sight so that it wouldn’t poke the gunner in the eye when the gun recoiled.
The improvements in accuracy were spectacular, and before long an American officer named William S. Sims embarked on a personal mission to bring these improvements to American ships. Sims was the quintessential entrepreneur; although he hadn’t invented the new system, he was utterly convinced of its value and passionately devoted to seeing it installed. And he was willing to rattle a lot of cages in the course of promoting it. For its part, the Navy acted as a bureaucracy might be expected to act. At first, it ignored Sims’ reports on the inadequacies of American gunnery technology and what could be done to improve it. The reports were simply filed away, where they provided a few good meals for the cockroaches that inhabited the file cabinets. When Sims became too insistent to be ignored, the Navy arranged a series of inappropriate tests that “proved” the inadequacy of the new system. Sims finally prevailed only after he succeeded in getting the attention of President Theodore Roosevelt, who installed him in a position that allowed him ultimately to become “the man who taught the Navy to shoot.”
The case of Sims versus the United States Navy is an admittedly extreme example of conflict between an entrepreneur and an entrenched bureaucracy. There are, after all, many examples of successful working relationships between innovative individuals and the organizations that employ them. Not every organization is structured along classic bureaucratic lines, and as we have already seen, an organization committed to innovation will likely have different structural characteristics than one pursuing routine activities. Still, there is no getting around the fact that organizations may find it hard to accommodate employees who take on the role of entrepreneur. These individuals can be arrogant, stubborn, and single-minded to the point of fanaticism. But at the same time, their vision and energy may be the most important element in their organization’s success. To take a recent example, Steve Jobs embodied the positive and negative qualities of the classic entrepreneur. He was an exceedingly difficult person in many ways, but without his vision and guidance Apple Computer would lie buried along with the dozens of defunct personal computer firms that are barely remembered today.
For many organizations, technological dynamism has required continual efforts to find a balance between the needs of would-be entrepreneurs and established organizational structures and processes. We cannot discard bureaucratic organizations, but we need to find ways that allow them to continue doing what they do best, while at the same time preventing them from obstructing the individuals whose efforts are a major source of technological advance.
Complex societies could not exist without organizations, bureaucratic or otherwise. Organizations are no less important for the initiation, development, and application of most technologies. At the same time, however, inappropriate organizational structures can stifle technological advance. Equally important, the controllers of powerful organizations can select and cultivate technologies that serve only their own interests. This problem is not confined to business organizations; it can also manifest itself in the public sector. Accordingly, we will turn our attention to the biggest and potentially most powerful organization of all: the federalgovernment.