For most people the greatest part of their waking hours is spent doing some sort of work. Be it as an assembly line worker, a sales clerk, or a psychiatrist, we gain our livelihood and a good measure of our individual identity from the work that we do. Technological change has been a major influence on the way we go about our work. Today, few of us are directly engaged in the actual production of things. Nor do we find it necessary to work from sunup to sundown in order to secure our livelihood. All in all, technological change appears to have lightened our workload substantially. Yet by now it should be apparent that the consequences of technological change are not always simple and straightforward. The development of technology over time has not always resulted in diminished workloads; in fact, the opposite has sometimes been the case. In this chapter we will examine the relationship between work and technology before the onset of industrialization. The facts and concepts developed here will provide perspectives that should be helpful when we consider subsequent changes in work and technology. 

The history of work is virtually synonymous with the history of the human species. To trace the influence of technology on work we need to begin with our likely ancestors, the Australopithecines, who were shaping and using stone tools at least 2.6 million years ago. Paleoanthropologists are not in agreement as to which group of primates are entitled to be put in our genus, Homo, but there is no doubt that making and using tools was one of their distinguishing characteristics. Although early stone tools have a crude appearance, this does not mean that the productive technologies early humans employed were primitive. From the outset, it is important to draw a distinction between the apparent crudity of the product and the skill that went into making it. Technologies in “primitive” societies are simple because only a few tasks are involved in the productive process, and a single person usually performs all of them. In these societies the division of labor is limited; a worker does everything required to produce something, and the work process is not fragmented into separate tasks allocated to different individuals. There may be some degree of specialization; a few jobs may be the exclusive work of women or men, or a worker may specialize in the production of a particular good, although again the task is his or hers from start to finish. But most workers in “primitive” societies do not specialize in a single task, so they are not likely to be virtuosos in a particular area. They are, as the old adage has it, jacks of all trades and masters of none. 
This lack of specialized skills does not mean, however, that workers in “primitive” societies are lacking in technical ability. Although the overall work process is simple, the individual workers may be highly dexterous and ingenious as they go about their work. Take, for example, the production of stone tools. What could be more primitive than “Stone Age” technology? But in point of fact, the production of stone tools is a considerable achievement. In the first place, the idea of making an implement by chipping a stone is hardly obvious. Although sea otters commonly use a stone for breaking clam shells, modifying a stone so that it can serve as a better tool is unknown in the animal world. Second, the fabrication of stone tools is a task that calls for considerable skill and practice. The effective chipping of a stone tool requires the preparation of a properly sited striking platform on the stone to be chipped, and the delivery of the striking blows at the proper angle. In some cases the stone is chipped by the use of a pressure chipping tool, such as a piece of antler, which forces a flake off as pressure is applied to it. Whatever the method employed, the production of stone tools is not a simple process; most of us would experience some difficulty in duplicating the work of early humans and protohumans. At the same time, new generations of toolmakers did not have to develop these techniques by themselves. The regularity of the tools’ shape and design suggests that the techniques of toolmaking were transmitted from person to person. An educational process was an integral part of Stone Age technologies. 
The use of stone implements by prehumans and early humans was a crucial factor in the development of a species of animal that would forever be characterized by its ability to make and use tools. This ability was not simply the result of biological evolution; it was at the same time a cause of it. The process through which early hominids evolved into humans began with the assumption of upright posture and the anatomical changes that made the hand capable of performing an increasing variety of tasks. One of the most important of these was the production and use of tools. In turn, tool use stimulated brain development and gave an advantage to those individuals whose mental capabilities allowed them to be the most proficient makers and users of tools. In sum, manual dexterity, tool use, and brain development evolved together in a mutually reinforcing manner. By the Upper Paleolithic era, this combination of evolved hands and brains had given rise to an impressive variety of equipment: pins, awls, needles with eyes, spoons, saws, axes, pestles for grinding, scoops, and shovels. Some early hunters discovered that they could double the distance that a spear could be thrown through the use of a throwing stick (also known as an atlatl), long before Archimedes (c. 287–212 b.c.) explained the principle of leverage.

Significant as the first tools were for human development, the control over the environment that they offered was modest indeed. It is easy to visualize a life that, in the classic formulation of the seventeenth-century philosopher Thomas Hobbes, was “nasty, brutish, solitary, and short.” A “primitive” technology seems to be associated with a precarious and insecure existence, one in which the daily struggle for mere subsistence occupied all of a person’s time and energy. But once again we fail to give technologically unsophisticated people the respect they deserve. Research on the actual lives of these people indicates that Hobbes may have been wrong, and that a life of unremitting toil is not a necessary consequence of a low level of technological development. 
Societies that sustain themselves through hunting and gathering are rare today. Still, there are a few parts of the world where agriculture and industry have not taken over and the ways of earning a living likely resemble the ones employed by our prehistoric ancestors. One such place is the Kalahari Desert of southern Africa, the home of the !Kung Bushmen. It is a harsh, difficult environment, one that would seem the natural locale for the kind of life described by Hobbes. Since they possess only the simplest technologies, it might be expected that the life of the !Kung is one of unceasing hardship, and that the bare necessities of life are obtained only through continuous toil. Yet this is not the case. As the field research of Richard Lee has demonstrated, the !Kung do not have to work especially hard. By gathering protein-rich mongongo nuts and over 80 other species of food plants, and supplementing these with the meat of game animals, the !Kung provide themselves with a nutritionally adequate diet. The work of gathering and hunting is not particularly arduous. On average, adults put in a six-hour workday about two and a half days a week. Earning a living thus requires only a total of 12 to 19 hours of labor each week. The remainder of the !Kung’s working hours are taken up with such activities as visiting and entertaining friends and relatives, and engaging in dances that put the participants into a trance. 
The modest work required to meet the needs of the !Kung has led one commentator to characterize the !Kung community as “the original affluent society.”Here, affluence is not the same thing as abundance, for the !Kung lack the material possessions common to more technologically advanced societies. A nomadic people, they have no permanent dwellings. Their clothing, as befits life in a warm climate, is minimal. They lack all but the most basic domestic utensils, and they have no way of conveying these except on their own backs. 
Besides not producing many material goods, they have not produced many of their own kind. They have controlled their rate of reproduction and have avoided putting excessive pressure on their environment. The population density in their territory is only 41 persons per square mile. In contrast, agricultural societies have densities ranging from a few hundred to several thousand, while urban centers in industrial societies may pack tens of thousands of people into a square mile of space. What the !Kung do have in great supply is leisure time. This leads to the seemingly paradoxical conclusion that technological progress may result not in the saving of labor but in its increase, or, as Marshall Sahlins puts it, “the amount of work per capita increases with the evolution of culture, and the amount of leisure per capita decreases.” Why is this so? The answer lies in the equivocal connection between technological change and the requirements of work. A technologically dynamic economy generates labor-saving devices, but at the same time it produces a steady stream of new goods that are eagerly sought after. This means that labor-saving technologies are generally used to increase income, not to reduce the hours of work. As workers in a technologically advanced society, we often find ourselves on a treadmill, working long and hard to obtain the material goods that we scarcely have the time to enjoy. 
The !Kung live lives of marked deprivation when measured against the material standards of most other societies. Their static economy and society have not produced the continually expanding and changing outflow of goods characteristic of technologically dynamic ones. Instead, they have maintained an equilibrium between their wants and their capacity to achieve them. Modest requirements and simple technologies have produced a way of living that lacks physical amenities, but leaves much more leisure time than can be found in our more “advanced” way of life. 

Although the !Kung way of life is a rarity today, it must be remembered that hunting and gathering was the dominant mode of existence over most of the history of humankind. This age-old pattern began to change about 12,000 years ago, when people in first began to cultivate their food instead of foraging for it. After its likely beginning in the Tigris-Euphrates Valley of the Middle East, within a few thousand years farming independently appeared in other parts of the world, most notably in Egypt’s Nile Valley, the Yellow River Valley in China, the Indus Valley in India, and parts of Central and South America. These were epochal developments, for in many ways the development of agriculture marked the most fundamental change in human life and the way it is sustained through work. 
Why, after tens of thousands of years of successful foraging, did humans take up farming, a transition that has been dubbed “The Neolithic Agricultural Revolution”? Much debate still surrounds this question. The movement from hunting and gathering to agriculture occurred over a long period of time in many different parts of the world, making it hard to generalize about its causes. Further complicating the matter is the lack of clearly defined boundaries separating the old ways of life from the new. Some hunting and gathering groups engaged in what might be termed proto-agriculture by encouraging the growth of certain plants and semi-domesticating animals. It also seems to be the case that in some regions hunting-and-gathering activities remained for hundreds if not thousands of years after the establishment of sedentary agriculture. On a more positive note, despite a lack of a consensus on all of the causes of the Neolithic Agricultural Revolution, most scholars agree that changes in population size, the climate, and the natural environment strongly affected many hunting-and-gathering societies and, at least in some cases, impelled a turn to deliberate plant cultivation.
Whatever its causes, the result was a new symbiosis between plants and people. Domesticated grains could not reproduce themselves as they had done before humans intervened. People had to assiduously cultivate these descendents of wild grasses, and their lives increasingly depended on regular harvests of grain. Technological progress thus resulted in a greater regularity of work patterns. Also, people had to work harder and more consistently because there were more of them. Agriculture allowed considerably higher population densities than those found in hunting-and-gathering societies, but at the cost of a greater workload for each individual. 

The interconnections between the development of agricultural technologies, population expansion, and increases in the amount of work performed can be seen through an examination of successive stages of agricultural technology. One of the earliest forms of farming, known as slash-and-burn (or swidden) cultivation, is based on cutting down indigenous vegetation and then burning it on the spot. This not only clears the land, but it also puts nutrients into the soil. A variety of crops are then planted on the cleared land. After harvesting, the plot is abandoned for a number of years, which allows the land to replenish itself before the cultivators return to begin the process once again. Slash-and-burn cultivation stands in an intermediary position between foraging and more intensive forms of farming, and it likely antedated the more settled forms of agriculture that were practiced in the aforementioned river valleys of India, China, the Middle East, and Central and South America.
Although slash-and-burn cultivation alters the environment more than foraging does, on the whole it makes fewer demands on the land than other forms of farming. The soil is given ample time to recover, typically five years or more, and every effort is made to nurture the tree seedlings that will regenerate the forest. The natural variety of plant life is preserved, thus avoiding the radical simplification of the environment characteristic of settled forms of farming. At the same time, slash-and-burn agriculture supports population densities greater than those found in hunting-and-gathering societies—up to 150 people per square mile—but with little increase in work effort. Slash-and-burn agriculture requires that an annual average of 500 to 1,000 person-hours of labor be expended on all phases of crop production. This comes to a little more than nine and a half to 19 hours of work a week, figures that compare quite favorably with the work schedules of the !Kung. In some societies, such as the Bemba of Zimbabwe, even less work is required. Only three to four hours of work are performed each day even during the busiest agricultural seasons, and averaged over a year, only one to two hours per day are required. Slash-and-burn agriculture requires less effort than more “advanced” forms of farming, but its drawback is that it cannot support large populations. One study of three Mexican farm communities that employed different mixes of slash-and-burn and sedentary farming technologies showed that almost 14 times as many families could be supported on the same acreage when irrigated farming was used instead of slash-and-burn methods. This, in fact, may be the primary reason for the development of settled, intensive agriculture. People began to practice this form of cultivation (perhaps while continuing to employ slash-and-burn techniques on other plots of land) in order to supply food to a growing population when no new land was available for cultivation. Settled forms of agriculture allowed more people to be fed because farm work was not dependent on the availability of vast tracts of infrequently cultivated land. The same farm plot could feed much larger numbers of people whose labor was in turn required by the much greater demands of sedentary farming. In extreme cases, such as that of early-twentieth-century China, with labor-intensive agricultural technologies the land could support enormous numbers of people—6,000 per square mile in some places.
The paradox underlying the development of agricultural technologies until recently is that as the land becomes more productive, people have to work much harder, for the increased productivity of the land is the result of an increase in the number of workers and the amount of work that they do. Settled forms of agriculture require labor not just for the direct tasks of soil preparation, planting, and harvesting. If the land cannot be left fallow for long periods of time, it is imperative that the farmer take an active role in maintaining the fertility of the soil; this requires gathering, storing, and applying organic wastes that range from animal droppings to the mud scraped from the bottom of ponds. Stubborn weeds and grasses must be removed at regular intervals. Unless rainfall is totally adequate, irrigation networks have to be built and maintained. Animals that provide power and manure must be cared for. Storage buildings have to be constructed. Farm implements need to be built and kept in repair. Plants require protection from insects, even if this means manually picking them off the growing plants. 
The adoption of settled agriculture thus signifies a steep increase in the amount of work that has to be performed. Irrigated agriculture in particular requires sharp increases in the amount of work performed. Surveys of farms in India show that with the introduction of irrigation much more labor is required while the crops are growing; work is no longer largely confined to plowing, planting, and harvesting. Twice as much labor may be required per unit of irrigated cropland than in the case of dry farming. All in all, as sedentary agriculture develops, the amount of work required goes up sharply. In Southeast Asia, for example, an agricultural economy based on the transplantation of rice seedlings into irrigated fields requires an annual average of nearly 300 person-days of work. This situation changes only when industrial products such as farm machines and chemical fertilizers are introduced into the farm sector. This began to happen in Europe and North America a century and a half ago, and in many parts of the world it is yet to occur. In these places, the biblical injunction that “in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread” is aharsh reality. 

At this point, one may question the benefits of an “advanced” technology. The three productive systems just examined represent successive stages in economic development, but it is by no means certain that they represent across-the-board progress, especially when the amount of time that has to be devoted to labor is considered. One cannot even say with certainty that they represent progressive increases in one critical component of technology, the amount of skill exercised by individuals, for the skills employed by foragers seem no less sophisticated than those employed by sedentary farmers, although the total skills found within the society as a whole may be greater in the latter case because the permanent communities that accompany sedentary agriculture allow specialization and a more extensive division of labor. 
These comparisons of foraging, slash-and-burn, and sedentary agriculture give a strong indication that technological advance does not necessarily result in the saving of human labor. We are accustomed to thinking that new technologies result in the diminution of human drudgery, but the example of the epochal shift from hunting and gathering and slash-and-burn agriculture to settled crop cultivation shows that this need not be the case. We are left with the sobering realization that the development of agriculture, one of the greatest technological advances in human history, resulted in dramatic increases in the duration, pace, and extent of human labor. 

Not all of the consequences of sedentary agriculture were so grim. Settled farming was paralleled by the development of towns and cities, which were often characterized by monumental architecture and other artistic advances. Dense permanent settlements also gave rise to specialized religious practitioners, as well as more complex modes of civil and military organization. Occupational specialization flourished, allowing craftsmen to turn out higher-quality work and produce entirely new kinds of goods. Agrarian societies also made possible the development of roads and other elements of infrastructure that facilitated the work of merchants and artisans, giving a further stimulus to occupational specialization.

In some cases, division of labor extended beyond workers specializing in a particular product; the work process was itself broken up. The Greek historian Xenophon (c. 430–354 b.c.) noted how on occasion shoe manufacture was subdivided: “One man earns a living by only stitching shoes, another by cutting them out, another by sewing the uppers together, while there is another who performs none of these operations but only assembles the parts.” A similar pattern can be observed in Rome during the days of the Republic, when the metalworking industry contained such occupational specialties as pattern makers, smelters, turners, metal-chasers, and gilders.The change in economic relationships necessitated by specialization was even more important than the products themselves. Specialized producers need to exchange their goods and services with others. This is commonly done through some kind of market. Production for a market instead of for the direct use of family and community members implies a different kind of relationship with others. For most of human existence work was performed as part of an extensive set of mutual obligations shared by members of the same group. But when work is done in order to make goods for sale in a market, it ceases to be embedded in particular social relationships. Instead, it is done as a freestanding activity, governed by self-interest rather than a sense of obligation to members of one’s group. The spirit of this kind of work was captured by a famous passage in Adam Smith’s eighteenth-century classic, The Wealth of Nations: “It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker, that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest. We address ourselves, not to their humanity, but to their self-love, and never talk to them of our necessities, but of their advantages.” 
A market-based exchange is one in which both parties participate in a transaction through which each expects to gain. When the transaction is completed, that is the end of the relationship. A car salesman may engage in some friendly conversation about your spouse and kids, but what he is really interested in is your money, just as your interest is getting a good price on the car. The relationship ends when he pockets your money and you drive off with the car. 
An exchange system such as this, cold-blooded as it may be, has vast consequences for the way work is done. When, as often was the case in the past, work is firmly rooted in a larger set of social relationships, the way that work is organized will not be governed solely by the technical requirements of the job.More will be at stake than efficiency, innovation, and the general development of production. It may be far more important to see to it that all members of the family or community are employed, or that jobs are parceled out not according to the abilities of the workers, but rather in accordance with their social position. For example, in India only members of the lowest castes engage in the tanning of leather, for this is considered an “unclean” occupation and therefore improper for a high-caste individual. 
Although urbanization results in more occupational specialization and some disentangling of economic and social spheres, this separation may not be fully realized. Particular occupations may be the special province of specific social groups. In the African city of Timbuktu, until recently, butchers, barbers, slipper-makers, masons, tailors, and smiths were all hereditary tradesmen, and in the case of the smiths, almost all marriages were between members of families involved in the same occupation. These alignments may be firmly buttressed by religious beliefs and practices that prevent the free movement of individuals into specific occupations. In Timbuktu it was widely believed that if someone other than a member of the Arna tribe tried to sew up a leather slipper, supernatural forces would cause the needle to jab his hand. In similar fashion, it was believed that one who was not a member of a mason family would suffer a fatal fall if he were so unwise as to attempt to build his own house. In societies such as this, the division of labor and the market system have not completely taken over. Although the economy is fairly complex, economic relationships are still kept within the context of the established social order. 

Families and tribes are not the only social groupings that regulate economic activity in traditional societies. In some traditional societies, such as medieval Europe, organizations known as guilds were of considerable importance. Guilds are groupings of people engaged in the same kind of occupation, be it manufacturing, trade, the provision of a service, or even begging and thievery. One of the primary purposes of guilds is to restrict the practice of a particular craft to members of the guild, who also control recruitment into the guild. Solidarity among guild members is further reinforced by regular festivals and ceremonial functions, such as observance of the feast day of the guild’s patron saint. These are not the only sources of solidarity; guilds also have a hierarchy of political offices that set rules, adjudicate disputes among members, and generally regulate the work activities of the members. 
Guild organization had significant consequences for the pattern of technological change and for the work activities of guild members. Entry into a guild began with a long period of apprenticeship. Apprentices spent much of their time on menial tasks, but they also had an extended opportunity to gain essential knowledge about their craft. Much of that knowledge involved the acquisition of tacit skills that could be acquired only through observing a master craftsman and by engaging in hands-on practice. The relationship between master and apprentice was closely constrained; the apprentice agreed to work for his master and not leave or get married without the master’s permission. In return, the master imparted craft skills and provided the apprentice with room, board, and clothing. Violation of these stipulations by either side could result in the payment of a cash penalty to the aggrieved party.
While guild organization and practice helped to preserve many technical processes, they also were a source of technological retardation. Although long apprenticeships facilitated the transfer of important skills, they also produced a kind of “trained incapacity” that locked guild members into set ways of doing things that inhibited innovation. Since the practice of a trade required membership in the appropriate guild, recruitment regulations and stipulated training programs set limits on who could practice a trade. These regulations often resulted in the exclusion of individuals who were not already members of a guildsman’s extended family.
Many other guild regulations and procedures worked against technological change. In order to maintain their monopoly positions and keep prices high, guilds set exacting standards for workmanship and attempted to restrict output. Limits were placed on the number of apprentices and other workers that could be employed in a guild-member’s shop, and deviations from normal work practices, such as working under artificial light, were prohibited. In general, technological innovations were discouraged, for the prime concern of the guild was the maintenance of the existing way of life. 
The inhibitions created by guild organization meant that economic and technological progress often required the establishment of enterprises in areas remote from guild control. This occurred in the Roman Empire, where craft workshops were established on great estates in the outlying provinces, far from the cities and guild regulation. Here could be found such technological and economic novelties as an establishment near Arles that boasted eight water mills, as well as glass and textile factories in eastern Gaul where work was done by wage laborers rather than independent craftsmen. It probably is no coincidence that the rise of modern industry first occurred in England, where guild restrictions were weaker than they were in the rest of Europe.

One of the most extreme means of tying occupation to social status is through the operation of an institution that is unfortunately all too common in human societies: slavery. Slavery was a major source of labor in the empires of the ancient world; it would not be an exaggeration to say that slave labor was the foundation for a large portion of economic life. Slavery persisted in early medieval Europe, although its spread was inhibited by the belief that Christians should not wage wars against fellow Christians for the purpose of enslaving them. By the thirteenth century the church forbade the buying and selling of Christian slaves, but no such restriction applied to people of other faiths, especially Muslims. Scattered vestiges of slavery could be found in eighteenth-century Europe, but by that time the major center of slave labor was the New World, where enslaved Africans supplied much of the labor for the plantation economies of the Caribbean, the American South, and parts of South America. The institution of slavery had a number of unfortunate consequences for work, worker motivation, and the development of workplace technologies. Slave labor was inefficient when compared to most forms of free labor because work had to be closely supervised with coercion as the main source of motivation. Slaves were charged with the performance of simple if arduous tasks, but little was expected of them in the way of initiative, innovation, or attention to detail. Slaves produced great amounts of wealth for their owners, but the institution of slavery powerfully inhibited the development of a skilled labor force, an essential component of long-term economic advance. It is sometimes asserted that slavery also inhibited the development and use of labor-saving technologies since slave owners paid very little for the labor supplied by their slaves, usually not much more than the cost of their subsistence. This is not altogether convincing; after all, slave owners could have increased their incomes by adopting technologies that enhanced the productivity of their slaves while still paying very little for their upkeep. More likely, slavery inhibited technological advance indirectly by engendering negative attitudes about work and its place in one’s life. 
The Greeks and Romans of the classical age often manifested a strong respect for work when it was part of a self-sufficient life style. But work was despised when it was done for another—be he a master or simply a customer—because it signified that the worker was locked into a relationship of servitude that prevented him from being a free citizen, whose proper activities were directed toward political life and the pursuit of pure knowledge. This attitude is exemplified by the assertion of the Greek philosopher Aristotle that “no man can practice virtue when he is living the life of a mechanic.” When slavery became widespread, as in the days of the Roman Empire, this attitude toward work hardened. Since more and more of it was being done by slaves, manual work was seen as an inherently degrading activity not fit for a free man. This attitude also characterized the American South before the Civil War. Although most white Southerners did not own slaves, they inhabited a culture in which manual work could easily be associated with slave labor. Due in part to the low status of manual work, the South had a weaker tradition of engineering and other technological endeavors. This was reflected in a much slower pace of industrialization than occurred in the North, and ultimately was one of the key reasons for the South’s defeat in the Civil War.

There are two ways to consider the relationship between work and time: in terms of the amount of time that is expended on work, and in the way that it is scheduled. Technological change altered both of these. As we have seen, in technologically simple societies where subsistence comes through foraging or slash-and-burn agriculture, relatively little time is expended on work. With the introduction of settled farming and the beginning of urbanization, the hours of work lengthened. Still, the sharp separation between work and other activities that we take for granted today was not nearly as pronounced. Work was intertwined with social events, religious observances, and community social activities. Moreover, the scheduling of work activities was much more lax. The work week was punctuated with religious feast days or other excuses for the avoidance of work. 
For the farmer, certain times of the year, such as sowing and harvesting, required long hours of work, but during other times of the year some leisure time could be enjoyed. Although a craftsman might spend long hours at his place of business, not all of his time was taken up with productive activities. Many hours were spent socializing with neighbors and customers. A good deal of time was spent on haggling over prices with prospective customers, an activity often done more for the sheer pleasure of bargaining than for any real economic purpose. Concern about time did not pervade workers’ consciousness. There was little of the frenetic desire to “get ahead” that is so typical of many inhabitants of the modern world. Jacques Le Goff’s description of the Middle Ages can be taken as typical of the general attitude: “On the whole, labor time was still the time of an economy dominated by agrarian rhythms, free of haste, careless of exactitude, unconcerned by productivity—and of a society created in the image of the economy, sober and modest, without enormous appetites, undemanding, and incapable of quantitative efforts.”
Above all, the idea of keeping to a fixed work schedule rarely took hold. As Gideon Sjoberg describes work patterns in a preindustrial city, “Merchants and handicraft workers generally do not adhere to any fixed schedule. Shopkeepers open and close their shops as they see fit. They may open one morning at nine, the next at ten, and so on. The lunch hour is likely to be longer on some days than others. Ambulatory merchants, likewise, are apt to keep rather irregular schedules.” 
These attitudes toward time and work seem to indicate that the producer was not concerned with the maximization of income. Work was not pursued with the kind of single-mindedness we seem to take for granted in the modern world. Nor was the time devoted to work considered a scarce commodity to be carefully utilized in order to bring the maximum economic return. These conceptions of work developed slowly and only in conjunction with major changes in the way people viewed themselves and their surroundings. In the Western world, a major impetus to these changes may have been religious. The rise of Protestantism, especially in its Calvinist form, gave a new centrality to work, for it made work into a quasi-religious “calling.” According to Calvinist doctrine only those predestined to salvation could hope to enter heaven, and material success was taken as a sign of being one of the chosen few. Equally important, this “calling” was manifested not just by a willingness to work hard in order to gain material success but also by a systematic and methodical approach to work. This spirit was clearly congenial to the regulation of work activities according to the dictates of a precise schedule.

Important as these changed attitudes might have been, “modern” attitudes toward work, especially the way it was organized and scheduled, also were influenced by a key invention that allowed the precise scheduling of work activities: the clock. To be sure, methods of telling time had existed throughout the ancient world. Sundials, candles with marked segments, and vessels that discharged water at a regular rate were all employed in antiquity. But each had drawbacks: sundials were useless at night and on cloudy days, candles could blow out, and water clocks froze in the wintertime. Equally important, most work activities in the ancient world required little in the way of precise timing and scheduling. These requirements arose only in conjunction with a new kind of social organization: the medieval monastery. By the standards of their day, these monasteries were very large enterprises, many of them containing hundreds of monks and other workers. Their cooperative efforts required precise scheduling, as did their patterns of religious observance, which required regular times for prayers, masses, and other religious observances. This was most pronounced in the monasteries following the Rule of St. Benedict, which divided days and nights into intervals of 12 hours each and required prayers to be said at sunrise, at the third hour of daylight, at noon, at the ninth hour of daylight, and at sunset.
The first clocks were built in the thirteenth century, their construction motivated by a growing awareness of the value of accurate timekeeping. The scheduling of activities through the use of special timepieces had brought economic benefitsto the monasteries and secular enterprises, and over time the idea of orderly routines and schedules had become an integral part of city life in late medieval Europe. There is the example of Philip VI of France giving to the city of Amiens in the fourteenth century a charter that allowed the issuance of an ordinance “concerning the time when the workers of the said city and its suburbs should go each morning to work, when they should eat and when to return to work after eating; and also, in the evening, when they should quit work for the day; and that by the issuance of said ordinance, they might ring a bell which has been installed in the Belfry of said city, which differs from the other bells.” It was in these urban centers during the early fourteenth century that the mechanical clock began to exert its influence. The ringing of the town bell could be specifically tied to the needs of emerging occupations, as when the governor of the county of Artois granted to the government of the city of the same name the right to construct a special belfry because of the “cloth trade and other trades which require several workers each day to go and come to work at certain hours.”
In addition to laying the foundation for a more regularized pattern of work, the clock embodied all of the key characteristics of a machine. It used an external source of energy (a spring or a falling weight), unlike traditional tools and devices that required human or animal muscle power. The even distribution of this energy required some sort of regulator, as typified by the pendulum discovered by Galileo and first applied to timepieces by Christian Huygens in Holland. The clock’s operation was automatic, requiring little human intervention. Finally, the clock put out a standard “product”—hours, minutes, and seconds.

In producing this standard product, the clock had made time into a kind of substance. Without getting into deep philosophical waters, we can assert that time as we tend to think of it does not exist; when we think or speak about time what we are actually dealing with are measures of time: seconds, hours, decades, or centuries. These units of time are then taken to have real substance and are treated as valuable commodities. Hence, we use phrases like “saving time,” “wasting time,” “spending time,” and “buying time.” Note too the assertion that “time is money.” 
The conversion of time into a commodity reinforces the rational spirit that was briefly described in Chapter 1. It stimulates the conscious choice of specific means for the attainment of given ends and provides a basis for judging the worth of a particular activity relative to others. Individuals in a society obsessed with time find it difficult to go about their work in an unplanned and irregular fashion. The precise scheduling of work received further emphasis as new mechanical technologies began to make their appearance. Spinning jennies, power looms, flour mills, and refractory furnaces, as well as the water wheels and steam engines that ran them, called for a mechanically paced way of working that was profoundly different from the old ways of doing things. The process that began with medieval monasteries and thirteenth-century clocks moved inexorably toward the conversion of most work into routinized procedures governed by artificial time schedules. In Chapter 11 we will look at these historical developments and attempt to bring them up to date. But before analyzing the effects of technological development on the quality of work today, we will examine an issue even more fundamental: the prospect that technological advance might leave many people with no work to do. 