The last chapter may have seemed a bit negative in its assessment of technology and the culture that supports it. In one regard, however, there is no denying technology’s positive consequences: technological advance has been the greatest single source of economic growth. If our material lives are better than those of our grandparents, it is largely because technological development has boosted the production of goods and services. Equally important, it has created entirely new products while at the same time improving the quality of existing ones.
Curiously, economists were slow to grasp this seemingly obvious fact. Conventional economic analysis identifies three basic “factors of production”: land (which includes natural resources), labor, and capital. Any increase in production is therefore taken to be the result of an increase of these factors. This view began to change in the 1950s when the historical course of economic development in the United States was analyzed through the use of sophisticated statistical techniques. It then became apparent that increases in the traditional factors of production did not adequately explain the actual record of economic growth. The amount of land had remained constant, and capital accumulation and increases in the labor force accounted for only 10 to 20 percent of economic growth during the first half of the twentieth century.1 Accordingly, the major source of economic growth was a “residual” factor of overwhelming importance. Most economists agree that technological advance is the main element of this residual, although organizational development and improved worker skills, along with economies of scale, are also key components. Still, as we have already seen, organization and skill are integral parts of technology, so it is reasonable to consider technological change as the major source of economic growth.

While technological development has been the primary source of economic advance, it has not been cost-free. One of the most pleasant myths about technology is that it can work its wonders without altering existing social arrangements. Americans in particular have often seen technological progress as the surest basis for progress in general, and have tended to believe that technological solutions to problems are less painful than solutions that require political or social changes.2 These beliefs are not easily sustained after an examination of the actual pattern of technological advance.
It is a truism that a particular technology can be used for either good or evil purposes; a construction team employs explosives to build a road, while a terrorist uses them for roadside bombs. But there is less appreciation for a more subtle point: technological change is often a subversive process that results in the modification or destruction of established social roles, relationships, and values. Even a technology that is used exclusively for benign purposes will cause disruptions by altering existing social structures and relationships. There are many technological changes that are small in scope, the effects of which are felt by only a few. A few technological changes are massive, and they lead to vast social restructuring. In either case, technology does not yield its benefits without exacting a cost.The disruptive effects of technological change can readily be seen in the economic realm, where new technologies can lead to the destruction of obsolete firms, as when the fabled Pony Express rapidly lost its customers after telegraph wires had been strung across the West. Of course, sometimes the disruption is less apparent when technological innovation results in the creation of entirely new industries that are not in direct competition with existing ones. Many new industries and individual firms owe their existence to the emergence of a newtechnology. Witness, for example, the rapid growth of personal computer manufacturing, peripheral equipment production, software publishing, and app development that followed the invention of the integrated circuit. Even so, lurking behind these successes were a number of failures, most notably the manufacturers of vacuum tubes and transistors, who faced a diminished market for their products.
Concerns about the disruptive effects of technological change are not new, as can be seen in an English magazine editor’s fulminations against the first railroads in 1835: “Railroads, if they succeed, will give an unnatural impetus to society, destroy all the relations that exist between man and man, overthrow all mercantile regulations, and create, at the peril of life, all sorts of confusion and distress.”3Anyone convinced of the virtues of technological change could easily criticize this reactionary view by noting how the railroad stimulated economic development and produced many social benefits. Even so, there is more than a grain of truth in the concerns expressed by the agitated magazine editor. Technological changes, both major and minor, often lead to a restructuring of power relations, the redistribution of wealth and income, and an alteration of human relationships.
The experiences of the Yir Yoront, a group of Australian aboriginals, gives us an excellent, albeit sad, example of the disruptive effects of a new technology.4 The Yir Yoront were a truly paleolithic people whose highest technological achievement was the stone axe. These axes were simple implements, but a considerable amount of skill went into their production. Several different materials had to be gathered—wood for the handle, bark for binding, and gum for fixing the head to the handle. The stone itself was obtained through an elaborate trading network that involved only adult males. The actual possession of the axes was also an exclusively male prerogative. Women and children could only borrow an axe, and even then only from close relatives. The axe also had an important symbolic value, for it was a totemic symbol that was used in certain religious ceremonies performed by men only. Thus, the production and use of the axes reflected and reinforced traditional social relationships based on age, sex, and kinship.
All this changed when steel axes began to be introduced into Yir Yoront society during the early twentieth century. These axes were dispensed as gifts by missionaries, and they were given to all “worthy” members of the society, including women, young men, and even children. As a result, mature men lost an important indicator of their distinctive status. At the same time, the trading networks between men of different tribes were bypassed. In their place new trading relationships emerged, with some men even prostituting their wives in return for the axes. The possession and distribution of axes no longer symbolized traditional relationships; a certain kind of freedom was achieved, but at the expense of confusion and insecurity. A more general malaise spread through the entire tribe, for the steel axes had no clear links with the religiously based explanations of how the world came to be as it was; they were alien objects whose origin could not be explained. Symbolically, steel axes represented a new world that the Yir Yoront could not comprehend. The result was rapid cultural disintegration and a bewildered and apathetic populace.
To be sure, it wasn’t the axes themselves that produced these disruptions. Steel axes were part of an outside world that was impinging on the traditional aboriginal order. Stone axes were an integral part of the indigenous technological system, while steel axes were alien intrusions that represented both a new technology and a new pattern of social relationships. For the Yir Yoront, the two were so closely intertwined that the introduction of a new artifact produced a social and cultural crisis that could not be surmounted.
Preindustrial people are not the only ones subject to the unpleasant consequences of technological change. On occasion, technological advance has fatally disrupted modern communities and the people living in them. One such place was Caliente, Nevada.5 Caliente was a small town with a variety of civic amenities—schools, churches, a hospital, a theater, a park, and many prosperous small retail businesses. Many of its inhabitants were proud members of civic organizations such as the Chamber of Commerce, the Rotary, the Masons, and the American Legion. It was a typical American small town, with typical American small-town values.
The life of the town was supported by a single industry: the servicing of steam locomotives. Caliente was an important division point on a transcontinental railroad, and many of the town’s people worked as machinists, boilermakers, and repairmen. Their incomes in turn supported Caliente’s commercial and civic establishments. Then, in the late 1940s, the diesel-electric locomotive rapidly replaced the steam locomotive. Diesels had many advantages; they were more fuel-efficient, hauled longer trains, and did less damage to the rails and roadbed. They also required less frequent servicing. When servicing was required, it took place in large centralized shops. As a result, service facilities were eliminated at many division points, and Caliente was one of them. The town lost its economic base, and within a few years it had become a shell of its former self. People moved out, homes were abandoned, and shops were boarded up. The local newspaper sadly noted, “Employees who have given the best years of their lives to this railroad are cut off without anything to which they can turn, many of them with homes in which they have taken much pride; while others, similarly with nice homes, are told to move elsewhere.”
The tragedy of this small town has been repeated in many other communities affected by technological change. Many places of employment have closed down as new products and processes have replaced old ones, leaving communities and their inhabitants in desperate straits. The technological advances that produced these dislocations may have benefited society as a whole, but at great cost to the people who were immediately affected.
Technological changes do not always result in the destruction or modification of an existing social order; sometimes they may help to preserve it, as happened when pneumatic molding machines were adopted by the McCormick reaper manufacturing plant in the 1880s.7 These machines were not installed, as conventional analysis would lead us to think, in order to reduce costs or to produce a better product; in fact, they were deficient on both counts. They were installed for the sole purpose of eliminating the skilled workers who formed the backbone of the National Union of Iron Molders, an organization that was challenging the entrenched authority of McCormick’s management. The molding machines allowed the replacement of skilled workers by unskilled ones, and three years later, having served their purpose, they were discarded by McCormick’s management.
Groups that are threatened by a technological innovation are not always as helpless as the iron molders apparently were. Many affected parties have been able to defend themselves against changes in the way of doing things. To take one example, prefabricated buildings were vigorously resisted by many local construction workers’ unions because they threatened their members’ jobs. One sad tale is narrated by Peter Blake:
Shortly after the end of World War II, an enterprising manufacturer decided to mass-produce a so-called service core: a complete “package” containing kitchen, bathroom, and utility room, with all fixtures, pipes, ducts, and wires in place, ready to be plonked down in any typical suburban house.
The first twenty of these beautifully designed and beautifully made “packages” arrived on a site near Detroit; local union plumbers and electricians promptly refused to install them. Finally, after nine months of heated debate (during which the units, parked on a sidewalk, were exposed to weather and vandalism), the local unions agreed to handle the “packages”—by disassembling them on the sidewalk and then reassembling them, piece by piece, in each of the houses. The manufacturer, needless to say, thereupon went out of business.
Nineteenth-century China provides another example of the efforts of a group of people defending their interests in the face of a potentially disruptive technological change.9 For centuries, the Chinese had produced silk thread by manually unwinding silkworm cocoons. The technology employed, although unsophisticated, was adequate to serve a substantial domestic and export market. Then, in 1859, a representative of the British Jardine Matheson Trading Company arrived in Shanghai with the intention of building a modern factory that would use steam-powered machinery to reel the silk. The machinery required skilled labor for its operation, and many problems were encountered in mustering an adequate labor force. This obstacle was eventually overcome, and the factory enjoyed an adequate measure of technical success. Unfortunately, it was not an economic success, for the high price of its basic raw material, silkworm cocoons, was not offset by increased productivity, and the enterprise suffered chronic losses until it closed down less than 10 years after its founding. The significant point here is that the factory could not obtain cocoons at reasonable prices due to the opposition of an entrenched silk-makers’ guild. Accustomed to monopolizing silk manufacture, the guild prevented most individual cocoon producers from having any dealings with the foreign operation, while the few who did were able to charge high prices for their wares. As happened with the disgruntled construction workers, the Chinese guild members effectively undermined a technology that threatened their established ways of doing things.

There have been many other occasions when individuals and groups have recognized that certain technological changes were not working to their advantage. In some cases, their reactions have taken a violent turn. The most famous of these are the outbreaks of machine-smashing that occurred in early nineteenth-century England.10 These attacks were the work of different groups who were collectively known as Luddites, a name that was derived from one Ned Ludlum, an apprentice stocking maker who, as legend had it, answered his master’s reprimand by smashing his stocking frames with a hammer. There was really nothing new about these attacks; the breaking of machines by disgruntled workers had a long history in England, the earliest recorded episode taking place in 1663. But the Luddite disturbances that began in 1811 did represent a substantial increase in the scale of these attacks; by the following year, the government had to deploy 12,000 troops to restore order to the parts of England affected by the movement.
Since these attacks coincided with an era of rapid technological change, it is easy to draw the conclusion that they were motivated by the fear of many workers that their jobs would be lost to new machinery. The actual story is a bit more complicated. Luddite attacks occurred in a number of separate branches of the textile industry, and each was characterized by a distinctive set of motivations and responses. The Luddite movement began in the hosiery trades, where there long had been opposition to the use of wider stocking frames that allowed the employment of poorly paid unskilled labor for the manufacture of an inferior product. The situation might have been resolved in a peaceful manner had it not been for the dire conditions encountered by many of England’s working people at the time. The Napoleonic wars had resulted in the closure of many export markets, leading to a general trade depression. To make matters worse, a series of bad harvests led to sharp increases in the cost of food, and many workers found that their wages were insufficient to meet their basic needs. These conditions produced a fertile ground for the spread of “collective bargaining by riot,” and Luddite attacks were soon fomented by shearers in the textile industry. Another occupational group, the handloom weavers, viewed the advance of steam-powered weaving machinery with understandable apprehension, and, following the example of workers in the hosiery trade, some of them attacked the factories housing mechanized looms, as well as the houses of their owners. Only in a few instances was the machinery itself directly attacked.
Luddite disturbances were expressly oriented toward the prevention of technological change in the cropping trade. Wool cloth was traditionally finished by raising the nap and then leveling the surface through the use of a heavy set of shears. The growing use of the gig mill, a device for raising the nap, along with the employment of a crude device for the mechanized cropping of cloth, threatened the livelihood of the traditional hand workers. They responded with some of the most severe attacks of the Luddite epoch. Although the machinery had been used for many years in many textile establishments, the severe economic conditions of the time brought matters to a head. More than the other instances of Luddite revolt, the attacks on cropping equipment were motivated by a deep fear of unemployment induced by technological change.
Within a few years the Luddite assaults came to an end due to the deployment of government troops; the execution, imprisonment, and exile to Australia of a number of the participants; and the general improvement in living conditions after the defeat of Napoleon. The succeeding decades of the nineteenth century also saw the replacement of the small manufacturing establishment by the large factory. Machine-smashing by riotous crowds was a likely form of labor protest when workers were scattered and lacking in permanent organizational linkages. In contrast, the large factory served as a fertile ground for the development of labor unions and other organizational vehicles for pressing the interests of workers. Industrial sabotage did not come to an end, but it was generally superseded by unionization and more effective forms of worker protest.

These early episodes of machine-smashing have led to the application of the “Luddite” label to anyone opposed to modern technology. But it is perhaps unfair to impute to the original Luddites a hostility to technology per se. As we have seen, most instances of Luddism were not motivated by a fear and hatred of new machinery; their grievances were those of people suffering from the low wages and unemployment caused by a generally depressed economy. The machines were seen as convenient targets of their ire rather than the sources of it.
This is not to say that attacks on new technologies are always motivated by concerns that transcend the technology in question. As the pace of technological change has quickened and people have become more aware of its consequences, numerous efforts have been made to prevent or restrict the spread of technologies that are perceived as threats. For example, computerization in its initial stage posed a threat to many established occupational roles and procedures, resulting in a fair amount of resistance to computer installation and use. In one case that received a good deal of national publicity during the mid-1970s, newspaper linotype operators in Washington, D.C., demonstrated their opposition to computerized typesetting equipment by engaging in large-scale industrial sabotage.
Another striking expression of Luddite sentiments appeared in 1995 when The New York Times and the Washington Post published a lengthy critique of modern society and the pivotal role of technology in creating and maintaining it. According to its author, a society based on modern technology brings some material comforts, but “all these technical advances taken together have created a world in which the average man’s fate is no longer in his own hands or in the hands of his neighbors and friends, but in those of politicians, corporation executives and remote, anonymous technicians and bureaucrats whom he as an individual has no power to influence.”11Regaining human freedom therefore required the total destruction of industrial society and the technologies that made it possible. This would not be a peaceful revolution, but one that required the destruction of factories, the burning of technical books, and the eradication of all of the components of an industrial civilization. This creed might have been dismissed as the agitated musings of a late twentieth-century Luddite, but its author was not just a misguided critic of the modern world. Shortly after the publication of the manifesto, it was discovered that its author was Theodore Kaczynski, dubbed by the media as “The Unabomber,” an elusive figure who from 1978 to 1995 had been responsible for 16 bombings that killed three people and wounded 23 others.

We have just seen how specific technologies have been used and resisted by particular groups in accordance with their own needs and concerns. These examples should help us to realize that technology does not proceed solely through its own momentum, as implied by technological determinism; its development is strongly influenced by existing social and political arrangements. Technological changes may take place because they advance the interests of a particular group. Conversely, some technologies may meet with stiff resistance because they threaten a group’s interests. Technologies do not stand or fall solely on their intrinsic merits. The decision to develop and deploy a new technology is often shaped by the distribution of power in a society.
Social and political arrangements affect the course of technological change by influencing the kinds of investments that are made, the research projects that are funded, and the general priorities that are established.12 Large organizations, such as corporations and government agencies, often wield disproportionate influence over the process of technological change. As we will see in Chapter 17, the federal government is a major source of financial support for research and development, with the Department of Defense, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and the Department of Energy (primarily for nuclear research and development) accounting for a large share of these expenditures. Although we can only speculate about alternative outcomes, it seems likely that American technology would have diverged markedly from its historic path if financial resources had been distributed differently.
Perhaps with a different set of sponsors, technological development might have made greater contributions to the solution of a number of pressing social problems, such as poverty and crime. At the same time, however, it can be argued that certain kinds of problems are simply not amenable to technological solutions. Even with significant changes in the funding of research, technological solutions to many social problems will not be forthcoming. This is an important objection, and we will examine it in the next section.

The growth of technology has brought dazzling changes to our lives. At the same time, we seem to be mired in problems for which there seems to be no solution. The continued existence of these problems is all the more frustrating when contrasted with the rapid progress of technology. For example, we can use all kinds of sophisticated medical equipment and techniques to preserve the lives of sickly infants who have been born many weeks premature, but we can’t seem to conquer the poverty that often results in sick infants. Why, it is often asked, is there such a gulf between technological progress and social progress? Why can’t technology be applied as a solution for more, if not all, of our problems? If we can put a man on the moon, why can’t we. . . ? 

These are troubling paradoxes, and in recent years we have searched for ways of finding technological solutions to a host of problems. The drug methadone has been widely used to eliminate addicts’ cravings for heroin. As highway accidents continue to result in tens of thousands of deaths and hundreds of thousands of injuries each year, efforts have been mounted to develop and manufacture cars capable of protecting their occupants from the consequences of incompetent driving. Cities befouled by graffiti have turned to the use of new paints and cleaning solutions that resist the endeavors of spray-can artists. Overweight men and women spend billions of dollars annually on medications, diet books, and exercise apparatus in the hope of shedding excess pounds.
The list of technologies that have been or could be applied to the alleviation of social problems is an extensive one, and examples could be supplied almost indefinitely. What they have in common is that they are “technological fixes,” for they seek to use the power of technology in order to solve problems that are nontechnical in nature. In this section we will briefly examine a few of these technologies and consider the extent to which technology can alleviate these pressing problems.One study of a number of technologies directed at the solution of social problems bears the significant title “Technological ‘Shortcuts’ to Social Change.”13 The authors examined a number of case studies, ranging from instructional television to intrauterine devices for birth control. As might be expected, the application of different technologies for the solution of social problems resulted in varying degrees of success, but a few generalizations can be made about the efficacy of technological solutions to social problems.
First, even if a technology “works” by producing the desired result, the actual mechanisms through which the technology produces a change are often poorly understood. This is particularly evident when the technology is used in conjunction with other interventions, such as the coupling of methadone maintenance with individual counseling. Technological shortcuts also produce uneven results; they work when applied to some segments of the targeted population but do nothing for the rest. Above all, technological solutions only eliminate the surface manifestations of the problem and do not get at its roots. A methadone program does not address the social and psychological causes of drug addiction, and improved methods of removing graffiti do nothing to mitigate the anger and alienation that may motivate the defacement of public spaces. These criticisms aside, technological shortcuts may be effective in alleviating a range of problems, and even though these problems may not be eliminated, their alleviation may at least come at a lower price than would be the case if nontechnological efforts at solutionswere employed.
Many other technological fixes have been employed over time, although not always with the conscious understanding that technology was being used in lieu of some other method of achieving a desired end. To take one example, at the beginning of the twentieth century the United States was undergoing severe growing pains; the urban population was expanding at a rapid rate, accompanied by congestion, pollution, and a host of other urban ills. In a nation steeped in the Jeffersonian belief that cities were inherently evil and that the countryside was the best location for virtuous living, the conversion of the American populace into a race of unhealthy and disaffected city dwellers was viewed with alarm. A number of technologies did make urban life more tolerable, most notably those concerned with public health and sanitation, but these only served to ameliorate living conditions without addressing the real issue: the desire of many Americans to escape the city and return to a vaguely perceived rural idyll.
The pursuit of this goal gave a great impetus to the development of transportation technologies that would allow the solution of urban problems by eliminating the need for cities, at least as places of residence. Instead of comprehensively addressing urban ills through planning and the development of social programs, Americans pinned their hopes on new transportation technologies. The first of these was the electric trolley. Through the construction of extensive networks of interurban electric lines, it was hoped, America’s urban problems could be literally left behind as a new generation of workers could commute from their places of work to their rural or suburban homes.
In many American cities the trolley was displaced by the automobile, yet a great deal of automobile ownership was motivated by similar sentiments. Widespread automobile ownership promised an escape from the harsh realities of America’s cities through individual commuting. As Henry Ford neatly summed things up, “We shall solve the city problem by leaving the city.”15 Ford’s sentiments were taken to rhapsodical levels by one early twentieth-century journalist:16Imagine a healthier race of workingmen, toiling in cheerful and sanitary factories, with mechanical skill and tradecraft developed to the highest, as the machinery grows more delicate and perfect, who, in late afternoon, glide away in their own comfortable vehicles to their little farms or houses in the country or by the sea twenty or thirty miles distant! They will be healthier, happier, more intelligent and self-respecting citizens because of the chance to live among the meadows and flowers of the country instead of in crowded city streets.
It is hardly necessary to note that these hopes were not realized. The mushrooming growth of suburbs spawned by trolleys and automobiles did not create a harmonious social order based on rural values. All too often the legacy has been suburban sprawl, the deterioration of city centers, visual blight, pollution, traffic fatalities, and many other social costs. This is not to say that the automobile has been an unmixed curse; the benefits of personal mobility, privacy, and a sense of power have been too eagerly accepted to allow such a judgment. But the automobile, just like its predecessor the trolley, was hardly the technological panacea that was envisioned. The examples of the trolley and the automobile remind us that while some specific problems may be amenable to technological solutions, larger issues rarely admit of easy solutions through the application of technological fixes. 

The main difficulty underlying the use of technology to solve social problems is that these problems are fundamentally different from technical problems. In the first place, social and technical problems differ in their specificity. If you intend to design an air conditioner, you at least know what your goal is: to keep a space cool. In many ways this problem is similar to the far more grandiose objective of landing a man on the moon; although there may be daunting technical problems to overcome, at least the goal is clear and unambiguous. But what if your goal is to reduce crime? Crime, unlike air temperature, is a very diffuse concept, encompassing everything from forgery to murder. Even when a particular crime is singled out for treatment, its causes are likely to be manifold and not easily addressed by a single technology.
To make matters even more difficult, social problems are directly concerned with human motivations and behaviors. It is one thing to change the temperature of the air by inventing and installing an air conditioning system; it is quite another to attempt to change human behavior through the same kind of technological intervention. Human beings are wondrously intricate creatures whose actions are governed by extremely complex motivations. Trying to understand, let alone change, human actions is an exceedingly difficult task. And humans are likely to resist when attempts are made to change their behavior.
It is also apparent that technological solutions work best when they operate within closed systems—that is, when the issue to be addressed is sealed off from outside influences. Of course, no technology exists in isolation from the surrounding society. A transportation system based on private automobiles, for example, is the result of choices exercised within the economic and political realm, such as a government’s decision to build a highway network. But within a given technology there are many specific matters that can be treated as purely technical problems. In these cases, it is possible to approach the problem directly and not worry about the influence of other factors. If your car fails to start one morning, you can be sure that the problem lies only with its components; you need not concern yourself with sunspot activity or a recent presidential election in Peru. When a problem is not so easily isolated, a technological solution is much less likely. Today, millions of children are diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactive disorder (ADHD). This behavioral problem undoubtedly has a neurological basis, at least for some children, and amphetamines such as Ritalin are routinely prescribed to alleviate the symptoms of ADHD. It is likely, however, that many children afflicted with the disorder have problems that go beyond the neurological. Dysfunctional relationships and actions within a family can create stresses that produce ADHD. Under these circumstances, the administration of a drug will be insufficient. As the ADHD website of the National Institute of Mental Health notes, “Sometimes, the whole family may need therapy.”
As a final point, it should be noted that no problem, technical or otherwise, is ever really “solved.” Not only are most solutions incomplete, they also generate new (and sometimes very different) problems. These “residue problems” may be considerably more intractable than the original problem.18 This process has been dramatically illustrated by the rapid development of modern medical technologies, a topic that will be explored in greater depth in Chapter 7. Technical solutions such as the development of life-saving drugs, organ transplants, and sophisticated diagnostic techniques have proliferated, but at the same time they have created a host of new dilemmas. Given the expense of many of these new technologies, it may be necessary either to spend more on medical care or to attempt to ration it. If these technologies are to be rationed, will this take place through the price mechanism, or will it be done according to some formalized procedure? In either case, serious ethical issues will have to be faced. Life-extending technologies have also raised vexing questions about the morality of prolonging a life under conditions that seem dismal indeed. Moreover, a longer individual life span leads to an aging population and the necessity for a wide range of adjustments to the society, the economy, and even the culture. Without belaboring the point, it should be apparent that no set of technologies will make our lives better without requiring the enactment of other changes.

These inherent limitations have not deterred a number of individuals and groups from trying to convert social problems into technical problems. There have been numerous flirtations with technocracy—the governance of society by engineers and other people with technical expertise, who attempt to develop policies based on technical and “scientific” principles. There is no denying that the technocratic vision is at first glance an appealing one. In a world too often governed by venal and incompetent politicians, there is something very attractive about a system of governance that supposedly bases itself on logic and the use of expertise. Moreover, where conventional political systems of all types seem endlessly involved with apportioning pieces of a small pie, adherents of some form of technocracy often promise a social and economic order that produces an ever-expanding pie through the application of the methods that have served technological development so well.
The promises and pitfalls of a technocratic approach to the solution of social problems are well illustrated by the theories of Scientific Management, as developed by Frederick W. Taylor (1856–1915) and his followers during the early decades of the twentieth century.19 Scientific Management arose in an era marked by a profound paradox: industrial production was increasing at a rapid pace, but at the same time American society was racked by large-scale and potentially explosive conflicts between workers and management. Many cures for labor unrest had been proposed, but for Taylor all of them missed the mark. Taylor had earned an international reputation as a metallurgical engineer, and his systematic studies on the cutting tools used for machining metal had resulted in major technological advances. If obdurate metals could be better controlled and shaped through the application of new technologies guided by scientific principles, why couldn’t the same thing be done with workers?
To achieve this goal, Taylor and his colleagues developed a “scientific” regimen for studying work. The main technique used for this task was the time-and-motion study through which workers were systematically observed and their work motions precisely timed. Through an analysis of these observations and measurements Taylor came up with a supposedly optimum set of motions for a given job, all of them subject to rigid time constraints. Equally important, the development and administration of these motions were the business of management exclusively, and any attempt by workers to go about their tasks independently would necessarily result in wasted motions and general inefficiency. A basic tenet of Scientific Management was that the planning and organization of work had to be separated from its actual execution. Only specially trained managers had the time and expertise necessary for the devising of optimal methods of production. The prime obligation of the workers was to do what they were told to do.
Although they had no power to plan and manage their own work, workers were supposed to benefit from the system. Because their work activities were now optimized, production would supposedly increase significantly. Workers would necessarily share in these higher returns, for Taylor also advocated that workers be paid according to piece rates rather than straight wages; the more they produced, the more they earned.
The technocratic spirit of Scientific Management is thus evident: the tasks and prerogatives of management rested not upon the exercise of raw power but on management’s technical superiority in guiding the production process. At the same time, Scientific Management promised relief from continual squabbling over relative shares of the fruits of production; an optimal system of organization would result in more of everything for everybody. Taylor was not content with using Scientific Management as a solution for the problems of the workplace; its principles, he claimed, “can be applied with equal force to all social activities: to the management of our homes; the management of our farms; the management of the business of our tradesmen large and small; of our churches, our philanthropic organizations, our universities; and our governmental departments.”
The appeal of Scientific Management was not confined to the United States, or even to the capitalist world. No less a figure than Vladimir Lenin, the leader of the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia, expressed a deep admiration for American technology and American forms of industrial organization, and for Taylor’s ideas in particular. Although he duly noted that Scientific Management embodied “the refined cruelty of bourgeois exploitation,” Lenin made it clear that its basic principles and procedures could contribute to the realization of Soviet economic goals: “The possibility of building Socialism will be determined precisely by our success in combining Soviet government and the Soviet organization of administration with the modern achievements of capitalism. We must organize in Russia the study and teaching of the Taylor System and systematically try it out and adopt it to our purposes.”

Although some of its elements, such as the use of time-and-motion studies, can still be found in contemporary managerial practices, Scientific Management in its pure form never took hold in the United States, the Soviet Union, or anywhere else. A number of technical problems impeded its use. Considerable skill was required for the administration of time-and-motion studies, and they were especially difficult to conduct in work settings not characterized by repetitious actions. But of equal or greater importance, both management and labor realized that the implementation of Taylor’s system posed fundamental threats to their own interests. Most managers were highly reluctant to delegate their authority to the dictates of “scientific” procedures.23 Workers, on the other hand, resented the loss of what little autonomy they had, and they widely believed—with considerable justification—that higher levels of productivity would result in the downward adjustment of piece rates, leaving them no better off than before the program had been enacted.
Scientific Management, like all technocratically inspired systems, ignored the distinction between technical and sociopolitical problems. Even if Scientific Management had generated the productive increases it promised—which is unlikely—it would still have been strongly resisted by those who had to submit to it. Scientific Management promised a conflict-free method of administration where no such thing was possible. Workers and managers had their separate interests, and each group was unwilling to entrust its fate to Taylor and his disciples.
The basic fallacy of Scientific Management, one shared by all other variants of technocracy, is that administration can replace politics. Administration is based on the application of rules that allow the realization of given ends. It is thus a manifestation of the rational spirit of applying the best means for the achievement of a particular goal. It does not, however, determine these ends. The Internal Revenue Service officials who administer the tax system are not the authors of the tax code. Around April 15 we may get angry about the perceived unfairness of the tax code, but it is pointless to blame the officials at the local IRS office.Tax codes and other policies are formulated through choices made in the political arena. Neither technology nor administration can supply the values that form the basis of these choices. They cannot tell us what we should do with our lives, nor can they help us to resolve the fundamental issue that all societies confront: how to distribute fairly life’s necessities and luxuries. The resolution of these issues will always be marked by sizeable differences of opinion and a good deal of conflict. The technocrat’s hope that society can be run on the basis of engineering principles will always remain an illusion.
To summarize, technological changes inevitably produce social changes. These changes, in turn, do not affect everyone equally. Although many technologies produce widespread benefits, not everyone benefits to the same degree, and there are instances where particular individuals and groups lose out completely. A choice of technology is often a determination of who wins and who loses; it is therefore proper that affected parties have the opportunity to participate in the process. This issue will be taken up in greater depth in the last three chapters. At this point it can at least be hoped that without deflating the very real achievements of technology, some sense of its inherent limitations has been conveyed. Technology and the procedures underlying its development have been immensely powerful in their own realm; outside this realm, however, they are less likely to be effective. Equally important, the methods that have been so successful in developing and applying new technologies cannot be transferred to the governance of society. Technological development may make some aspects of our lives better, but it can never substitute for a just and effective political and social system.